Quarterly Reviews of Biophysics 43, 1 (2010), pp. 65–158. f Cambridge University Press 2010           65
doi:10.1017/S0033583510000041 Printed in the United States of America




Structures of membrane proteins

Kutti R. Vinothkumar* and Richard Henderson*
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK




Abstract. In reviewing the structures of membrane proteins determined up to the end of
2009, we present in words and pictures the most informative examples from each family.
We group the structures together according to their function and architecture to provide an
overview of the major principles and variations on the most common themes. The first
structures, determined 20 years ago, were those of naturally abundant proteins with limited
conformational variability, and each membrane protein structure determined was a major
landmark. With the advent of complete genome sequences and efficient expression systems,
there has been an explosion in the rate of membrane protein structure determination, with
many classes represented. New structures are published every month and more than
150 unique membrane protein structures have been determined. This review analyses
the reasons for this success, discusses the challenges that still lie ahead, and presents a concise
summary of the key achievements with illustrated examples selected from each class.


 1. Membrane protein overview              66

 2. Channels and pores 69
    2.1 Tetrameric ion channels 70
    2.2 Pentameric ligand-gated ion channels 73
    2.3 Hexameric ion channels 73
    2.4 Trimeric ion channels 76
        2.4.1 Acid sensing ion channels 77
        2.4.2 P2X4 receptor 79
    2.5 Viral ion channels 79
    2.6 Mechanosensitive channels 80
        2.6.1 Mechanosensitive channel, large 81
        2.6.2 Mechanosensitive channel, small 81
        2.6.3 Gating of MscL and MscS 83
        2.6.4 Eukaryotic MS channels 84
    2.7 Aquaporins 85
    2.8 Ammonia channel 87

 3. Active transport 90
    3.1 Primary transporters 90
        3.1.1 P-type ATPase 90
        3.1.2 Light-driven pumps 93


  * Authors for correspondence : K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson, MRC Laboratory of Molecular
Biology, Hill Road, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK.
  Tel. : 44-1223-402405 and 44-1223-402215 ; E-mail : vkumar@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk and rh15@mrc-lmb.
cam.ac.uk
66     K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

         3.1.3 ATP synthases 94
         3.1.4 ABC transporters 97
     3.2 Secondary transporters 101
         3.2.1 ADP/ATP translocase and tripartite architecture of mitochondrial carriers   103
         3.2.2 Parallel topology 104
         3.2.3 Antiparallel topology 104
     3.3 Mechanism of secondary transporters 107

 4. Protein translocators        109

 5. Electron transport chains 111
    5.1 Complex I – NADH :ubiquinone reductase 113
    5.2 Complex II – succinate :ubiquinone reductase 113
    5.3 Complex III – ubiquinol :cytochrome c reductase 114
    5.4 Complex IV – cytochrome c oxidase (aa3) 115

 6. Photosynthesis        116

 7. G-protein-coupled receptors          119

 8. Membrane enzymes 120
    8.1 Intramembrane proteases 120
        8.1.1 Rhomboids 121
        8.1.2 Site-2 protease 121
    8.2 Thiol oxidases 123
    8.3 Membrane associated proteins in eicosanoid and glutathione metabolism      125
    8.4 Methane monooxygenase 126
    8.5 Monotopic membrane proteins 126

 9. b-Barrel membrane proteins           127

10. Magnesium transport proteins           131
    10.1 CorA 131
    10.2 MgtE 133

11. Pore-forming toxins         134

12. Key technologies 136
    12.1 Membrane protein expression and purification 136
    12.2 Three-dimensional crystallisation and X-ray crystallography   137
    12.3 Electron cryomicroscopy 141
    12.4 NMR spectroscopy 142

13. Future prospects and challenges            142

14. Acknowledgements            143

15. References      144



1. Membrane protein overview
Membrane proteins are among the most fascinating structures in biology. They are by deﬁnition
sited at the interface between two compartments, such as between cytoplasm and extracellular
space, or between mitochondrial matrix and intermembrane space, or else they make up most of
                                                             Structures of membrane proteins      67

the mass of the small vesicles involved in endocytosis, exocytosis or intracellular traﬃcking. For
most of their life, they interact closely with both water and lipid in their environment, yet must be
synthesised by the ribosome just like other proteins and then make their way to diﬀerent mem-
brane locations within a cell. This places unique and sometimes conﬂicting demands on mem-
brane proteins for folding, translocation and stability. Most membrane proteins function in
transport or signalling or provide the structural framework that shapes cellular compartments. In
signalling, they provide both the sensory input and the output, usually by involvement directly or
indirectly in the release of signalling molecules. Other membrane proteins are key components of
energy transduction, converting chemical energy into electrical energy, or electrical energy into
either mechanical energy or synthesis of ATP, the universal energy currency of the cell.
   Knowledge of their structure tells us how they are oriented relative to the lipid bilayer and
often suggests how they work. As a result, the structure of membrane proteins provides a rich
source of information in biology. In the very practical search for better drugs to improve human
and animal health, many targets are membrane proteins involved in signalling or growth control
at the cell surface. Over the last 20 years, there has been enormous progress in understanding
membrane protein structure (Fig. 1). With over 150 unique structures now available and multiple
sets of coordinates deposited for many structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB), it is an
excellent moment to review the ﬁeld.
   Historically, it was not until the invention of SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Shapiro
et al. 1967 ; Weber & Osborn, 1969 ; Laemmli, 1970) and its early application to the membranes
of red blood cells (Lenard, 1970) and rod outer segments (Heitzmann, 1972) that our under-
standing of membrane structure progressed from the unit membrane hypothesis of Danielli &
Davson (1935) and Robertson (1957) to the ﬂuid mosaic model (Singer & Nicolson, 1972).
Before the advent of recombinant DNA technologies, research eﬀorts were limited to membrane
proteins available in reasonable quantities from natural sources. This period represented the ﬁrst
phase of membrane protein structure determination. It included work on membrane proteins
from chloroplasts, mitochondria and bacteria that were involved in energy transduction or other
functions that require high levels of expression. These high expression levels in native cells were
usually accompanied by low turnover rates, and this correlated with relatively good stability in the
fairly restricted range of detergents available initially. More powerful cloning methods involving
novel leader sequence or whole protein fusions to increase expression levels, better detergents
and the invention of tags such as polyhistidine (Hochuli et al. 1988) that allowed rapid puriﬁ-
cation have now made it possible to express and purify any membrane protein for which the gene
or cDNA had been identiﬁed. However, progress in membrane protein structure determination
was still slow because many, perhaps most, membrane proteins turned out to be relatively
unstable in detergent and therefore diﬃcult to work with. The normal environment of a mem-
brane protein in a lipid bilayer includes contact with a ring of closely packed headgroups on each
side of the lipid bilayer with the most ﬂuid, mobile part of the bilayer being in the middle of the
membrane. In contrast, the detergent micelle that surrounds a solubilised membrane protein
provides the opposite situation in which the least ordered, most mobile part of the micelle is in
the surface region normally occupied by the lipid headgroups. In addition, some of the earliest
membrane protein structures determined were those of proteins involved in photosynthesis or
electron transport, in which the proteins function to provide a rigid environment for ﬁxed
cofactors. This rigidity contributed to their stability and helped to produce well-ordered crystals.
   The second phase of successful membrane protein structure determination did not start until
the complete sequences of bacterial genomes started to become available in the 1990s.
68     K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




Fig. 1. Progress of membrane protein structure determination. Starting with the ﬁrst structure in 1985, 174
unique membrane protein structures have been determined till the end of 2009. However, the Protein Data
Bank (PDB) holds many more than this with for example, over 60 coordinates each for reaction centres and
bacteriorhodopsin alone. We have included in the chart only polytopic membrane proteins that have a
functional role within the membrane and not intrinsic membrane proteins with only a single, presumably
regular trans-membrane a-helix. Mutants, diﬀerent conformational states, structures with bound substrates/
inhibitors of the same protein, or membrane proteins from diﬀerent species with >70 % sequence hom-
ology are counted only once. There are numerous ways of classifying membrane protein structures : here we
present the distribution classiﬁed on the basis of a-helical or b-barrel secondary structure ; a diﬀerent
classiﬁcation on the basis of prokaryotic or eukaryotic origin can be found elsewhere (Carpenter et al. 2008).
In the early years, structures were determined from proteins that were abundant in their natural environ-
ment including the reaction centres (1985 and 1987), bacteriorhodopsin (1990), porins (1992), light
harvesting complex (1994) followed by a variety of electron transport and photosynthesis complexes. The
ﬁrst structures of membrane proteins expressed recombinantly started to emerge from 1998 (KcsA, MscL,
OmpA and FhuA). Since then, the availability of sequenced genomes in the late 1990s propelled the rate of
membrane protein structure determination, which has reached its highest level in the past two years. The
following link provides a complete list of available structures with links to the PDB (http://blanco.
biomol.uci.edu/Membrane_Proteins_xtal.html). In this review, we give the PDB accession number for the
structures shown in the ﬁgures.

By searching the genome sequences of a range of mesophilic, thermophilic or hyperthermophilic
bacteria for homologous membrane protein genes and then screening a large number of these for
good expression, stability and crystallisation, there has been considerable success in the deter-
mination of many prokaryotic membrane structures. One of the earliest examples was the work
on bacterial mechanosensitive channels, MscL (Chang et al. 1998). In other cases, the proteins
were often of unknown biological function in the bacterium from which they were obtained.
Nevertheless, their sequence homology with other membrane proteins of known function meant
that the determination of their structure was a great step forward because it provided a con-
nection of structure to function for some important membrane protein families. Early successes
of this approach, which has had a substantial impact on our understanding of the architecture of
membrane proteins, were members of the bacterial potassium channel family (MacKinnon,
2004b) and the ABC transporter family (Locher et al. 2002). Many other types of bacterial
channels and transporters have now joined these early successes.
                                                             Structures of membrane proteins      69

   In recent years, we have arguably entered a third phase of membrane protein structure analysis
with the successful demonstration of generic strategies to stabilise and crystallise unstable,
eukaryotic membrane proteins. Although many membrane proteins, especially those from
eukaryotes, have evolved to be adequately stable in vivo in lipid bilayers, which are often made less
ﬂuid by the presence of cholesterol or other rigidifying membrane components, they can be
highly unstable in the detergent micelles into which they must be extracted for puriﬁcation, and
even less stable in some of the smaller, harsher detergents that have been most successful in
crystallisation. Indeed, the rapid synthesis, turnover and degradation of a typical membrane
protein is often important for its normal dynamic function, allowing a rapid response to diﬀerent
demands on the cell. During evolution, proteins are subjected to many pressures, so that they
tend to be only as stable as they need to be in their normal lipid environment. For crystallisation,
such unstable membrane proteins must be stabilised either by timely reinsertion into a lipid
bilayer, such as with 2D membrane crystals (Kuhlbrandt, 1992) or with lipidic phase, detergent-
free crystallisation methods (Nollert et al. 1999), or by the addition of speciﬁc active-site ligands
or inhibitors (Pebay-Peyroula et al. 2003 ; Vedadi et al. 2006 ; Toyoshima, 2008), or by systematic
mutagenesis to create a protein with more intrinsic stability (Magnani et al. 2008 ; Serrano-Vega
et al. 2008). This third post-genomic phase should allow the structure of any membrane protein
or complex of interest to be determined.
   Structures of membrane proteins follow simple rules governed by their hydrophobic nature
and the restrictions posed by the lipid bilayer. Following the determination of the seven trans-
membrane (TM) helix structure of bacteriorhodopsin (Henderson, 1975), it was thought that TM
proteins might consist of either a-helical bundles or b-barrels, because the fully satisﬁed back-
bone hydrogen-bonding found within these two classes of structure would avoid unfavourable
interactions of backbone amido or carbonyl groups with the hydrophobic lipid bilayer environ-
ment (Henderson, 1981). With a few extremely informative exceptions, which will be discussed
further in this review, these two types of structures have turned out to be the predominant
structural theme of all membrane proteins, with a-helical bundles being found almost exclusively
in cytoplasmic and subcellular compartment membranes and b-barrels being found almost ex-
clusively in the outer membranes of bacteria, mitochondria and chloroplasts. A deviation from
regular a-helix is frequently observed in membrane proteins usually to satisfy some aspect of
function and will be highlighted in the review when possible. In the area of membrane protein
biogenesis, the initial hypothesis of helical hairpin insertion (Engelman & Steitz, 1981) was
followed by the two stage model (Popot & Engelman, 2000), discussions of the physical prin-
ciples (White & Wimley, 1999) and the positive-inside rule (von Heijne, 2006) with recent
considerations of additional steps (Engelman et al. 2003) and the idea of signiﬁcant protein and
lipid ﬂuidity. However, the kinetics of membrane protein synthesis, insertion and degradation
will not be covered in this review, which will focus purely on structure.


2. Channels and pores
The term channel or pore implies an opening in the membrane through which a molecule or ion
can pass that, depending on speciﬁcity, may or may not involve a binding and recognition step.
Some of these proteins form selective channels conducting a particular ion, others select for
cations or anions, and yet others are non-selective. Channels can be gated by voltage or a ligand.
Channel-forming proteins that are ion-selective usually have pores lined with charged amino
acids or electrostatic dipoles. The width of the pore determines whether an ion ﬂows through the
70    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

channel in a hydrated or dehydrated state. Non-selective channels have wider pores that allow
the ions to pass in their hydrated state. The probability of ions shedding their hydration shell is
greatly increased when the pore is narrow with charges and dipoles on the wall of the channel.
A cation channel has negatively charged residues within or near the entrance of the pore to
attract cations and repel anions while the reverse is true for anion speciﬁc channels. There are
also channels that conduct small molecules such as water, glycerol, ammonia and cAMP. Although
these small molecule channels have a diﬀerent architecture they share some of the properties of
ion channels. We discuss below the known structures of channels classiﬁed by their type and
function.


2.1 Tetrameric ion channels
There has been a great deal of progress in understanding ion channels in membranes, particularly
voltage-gated ion channels. The overall architecture of this family shows a tetrameric arrangement
of identical subunits or a single polypeptide linking together four homologous repeats, or in rare
intermediate cases two polypeptides with two repeats each. The channels fall into two further
classes : simpler channels have two TM a-helices per subunit whereas more complex channels
have six TM a-helices. From the point of view of membrane protein structure, a number of
interesting principles are revealed by these structures. These include the nature of the ion pores,
how they open and close, and how the TM electric ﬁeld can be sensed and coupled to channel
opening and closing.
    The most signiﬁcant step forward in understanding the structural basis of the ion speciﬁcity
and ﬂux came from the ﬁrst structure of the bacterial potassium channel (Doyle et al. 1998) KcsA
in 1998, the importance of which was acknowledged by award of the 2003 Nobel Prize for
Chemistry to Rod MacKinnon (MacKinnon, 2004a), shared with Peter Agre for his work on
water channels, which are presented in section 2.7. The original KcsA structure consisted of 97
amino acids in each of the four subunits. It showed the inner of the two TM helices of each
subunit forming an inverted teepee centred on the molecular fourfold axis.
    The short re-entrant loop between the two TM helices, consisting of a ten-residue pore helix
and a four-residue stretch of b-structure (b-pore) in each subunit that forms the selectivity ﬁlter,
is located within the teepee (Fig. 2 a). The carboxy termini of the four pore helices point directly
at a central cavity at the core of the protein, and the carbonyl groups of the short selectivity ﬁlter
line the narrowest part of the pore near the extracellular surface. The dipoles of these short
helices may help to stabilise the cation when it is at the centre of the membrane and the carbonyl
groups provide the lining for the pore of the K+-ion selectivity ﬁlter (Doyle et al. 1998). The tight
turn between the pore helix and the b-pore partly lines the central aqueous cavity. Subsequent
higher resolution structures, in complex with an Fab antibody fragment, showed the potassium
ion coordination and hydration in more detail and how the structure adapts to low and high
potassium concentration (Zhou et al. 2001) as the channel opens and is exposed to the higher
intracellular potassium concentration. The central cavity accommodates a single highly hydrated
potassium ion surrounded by eight ordered water molecules, plus additional partially ordered and
disordered water molecules. The narrow selectivity channel can accommodate a line of potassium
ions interspersed with water molecules. The role of the selectivity ﬁlter can be appreciated by
comparing KcsA with a non-selective cation NaK channel from Bacillus cereus (Shi et al. 2006).
    It has been proposed that the structure obtained for another bacterial potassium channel,
MthK ( Jiang et al. 2002), is representative of the open state of this family of channels, since its
                                                                  Structures of membrane proteins          71




                   (a)                                                 (b)
Fig. 2. Tetrameric potassium channels: (a) KcsA (1K4C) and (b) Kv1.2/Kv2.1 chimera (2R9R) with
extracellular side at the top. Potassium ions are shown as red spheres. The prokaryotic channel KcsA
represents the simplest potassium channel with two TM helices. Each subunit is coloured individually. The
extracellular (top) section of the pore has a stretch of b-structure conserved by evolution for potassium ion
selectivity. The gating of KcsA is thought to occur by a change in pH, with the channel opening at acidic pH
(Heginbotham et al. 1999). Many other K+ channels have a more complex architecture with six TM helices.
The structure of the Kv1.2/Kv2.1chimera (Long et al. 2007) is one such example. The pore forming helix S5
and outer helix S6 are coloured as in KcsA. The voltage sensing S4 helix (dark blue) is replete with arginines
that are thought to move in response to a change in membrane potential resulting in opening or closing of
the channel. Voltage-gated K+ channels also have a b-subunit (light orange) that is essential for regulation
and makes contact with the TM domain via linker T1 (brown). The structure of KcsA depicts a closed
channel while the Kv1.2/Kv2.1 chimera is probably an open depolarised state.



structure shows a large movement of the cytoplasmic half of the inner helix, with a pronounced
30x bend at a glycine residue to create a 12-Å wide channel opening. The high ion ﬂow rate and
selectivity of the channels can be explained by the structures ( Jiang et al. 2002). The helix bending
that underlies gating in diﬀerent potassium channels may occur at this or other glycine or proline
residues along the inner helix, such as in KirBac1.1 (Kuo et al. 2003).
   The mechanism of the opening and closing of the six-helix voltage-dependent sodium and
potassium channels has been less easy to explain than the simpler gating of the two-helix pot-
assium-selective channels, because of their greater complexity and larger number of functional
states. The six-helix channels are of great importance since their function underlies all mam-
malian nerve and muscle function (Tempel et al. 1987 ; Catterall, 2000). Electrophysiological
measurements and site-directed mutagenesis of both native and chimeric proteins have shown
that the ﬁrst four helices, named segments S1–S4, form the voltage sensor domain. This S1–S4
72    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

domain appears to be relatively independent and interacts with the tetrameric, channel forming,
S5–loop–S6 domain, to open and close the channel in response to membrane potential. The
structure of the S5–loop–S6 domain from six-helix potassium channels is very similar to that of
two-helix KcsA channels ( Jiang et al. 2003a). Along S4, a series of four to seven positively
charged arginine or lysine residues (named R0 to R6 in Kv2.1), spaced every three residues, has
been shown to respond to the membrane potential by moving across the electrical width of the
membrane.
   Structures for 4 six-helix potassium channels have been determined ( Jiang et al. 2003a ; Long
et al. 2005a ; 2005b, 2007). The earliest structure KvAP ( Jiang et al. 2003a, b) is now thought to
show non-physiological conformations for S1–S4, in which the harsh detergent, octyl-glucoside,
used for crystallisation has perturbed the structure. The second structure Kv1.2 (Long et al. 2005a)
used milder detergents plus added lipid in crystallisation, so it shows a structure with the mol-
ecules arranged in membranous layers, and likely to represent the open form occurring in depo-
larised membranes where there is no membrane potential. However, this second structure was at
relatively low resolution so did not allow reliable identiﬁcation of side chain identity. The third
structure (Long et al. 2007) of a Kv1.2/Kv2.1 chimera, also crystallised using mild detergents plus
lipids, has higher resolution with clear side-chain density, a more continuous polypeptide chain
and ordered interhelical loops. It is currently the best structure available representing the open,
depolarised state of a six-helix voltage-dependent ion channel (Fig. 2 b). It shows a compact four-
helix bundle in which ﬁve of the seven positively charged residue positions in S4 are accessible
on the outside surface of the membrane either directly to solvent or via hydrogen bonds to a
negatively charged cluster of glutamate side chains, as expected and required for opening of the
voltage-gate in the depolarised state.
   The structure of a closed, hyperpolarised form of any six-helix voltage-gated channel is un-
known and may be diﬃcult to determine, since it normally requires membrane hyperpolarisation
to around x100 mV, which is diﬃcult to create in a crystal. Nevertheless, a hypothetical
mechanism for voltage gating has been proposed (Long et al. 2007) that involves a major 12- to
15-Å inward sliding movement of S4 relative to S1 and S2 (to close the channel), with a smaller
accompanying movement of S3b. In this proposed S4 translation, possibly accompanied by a
concertina-like shift of the 310-helical region along S4, the location of the positively charged side
chains in S4 move from being extracellular to being eﬀectively intracellular. This proposed
movement to explain the mechanism of voltage gating is smaller and subtler than the paddle-
like movement proposed earlier ( Jiang et al. 2003a). Residue arginine R2, for example, hypo-
thetically moves from being exposed on the outside surface in the open state to forming a salt
bridge with the conserved glutamic acid in S2 that is eﬀectively on the inside. The predominance
of arginine rather than lysine side chains in S4 and the interaction of some of them with other
negatively charged side chains may reduce the energy barrier for crossing the membrane by
distributing the charge more widely, as noted previously ( Jiang et al. 2003b). Coupling of the
voltage-dependent structural rearrangement of S4 is likely to involve the exercise of a mechanical
force on the S4–S5 linker which then pulls open the channel gate formed by the cytoplasmic
ends of the S6 inner helices (Long et al. 2007).
   Finally, the TM region of a bacterial cyclic nucleotide-regulated channel, MlotiK1 represents
another class of potassium channels (Clayton et al. 2008). MlotiK1 is not voltage-gated, yet has an
S1–S4 domain that is a slightly more compact a-helical bundle than in Kv1.2/Kv2.1. The key
positive and negatively charged side chains present in S4 of the voltage-gated channels are
uncharged in MlotiK1. The opening of this channel appears to involve a direct bending of the
                                                            Structures of membrane proteins      73

cytoplasmic end of S6 triggered by a structural change when cyclic nucleotide binds to the cyclic
nucleotide-binding domain that is covalently connected to the C-terminus of S6.

2.2 Pentameric ligand-gated ion channels
The pentameric ion channels make up a well-conserved but widespread family (Tasneem et al.
2005) that has many important roles in human physiology, the best known being that of chemical
signalling at the neuromuscular junction. The channels are ligand-gated though, in some bacterial
homologues, the ligand may be as small as a hydrogen ion. They form homopentameric or
heteropentameric assemblies, with the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, having a subunit com-
position of a2bcd, being the most studied. The a-, b-, c- and d-subunits are homologous, with
the two a-subunits being responsible for ligand binding. In vertebrates, members of this family
include the GABAA, glycine and 5-HT3 receptors. By comparison, the equally important gluta-
mate ion channels, including AMPA, kainate and NMDA are probably related to the tetrameric
potassium voltage-gated ion channels discussed in section 2.1.
   The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (AChR) structure has been determined at 4-Å resolution
by electron microscopy of helical arrays from the Torpedo electric organ (Miyazawa et al. 2003 ;
Unwin, 2005). The interpretation of the density map was helped by a knowledge of the structure
of a homologous non-membrane protein, the acetylcholine binding protein (AChBP) from
mollusc synapses (Celie et al. 2004), which was shown to have a two sheet b-sandwich structure
using X-ray crystallography. The acetylcholine receptor thus consists of a pentamer of the ex-
tracellular b-domains, which form the N-termini of the polypeptides, attached to the trans-
membrane C-terminal domains with four transmembrane helices per subunit, making 20
transmembrane helices altogether (Fig. 3 a). The structure of AChBP in complex with acet-
ylcholine and other ligands also showed that the ligand-binding site lies at the boundary between
adjacent subunits in the pentamer. In the case of a homopentamer like AChBP, there are ﬁve
binding sites per pentameric molecule, whereas the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor has two at
the interfaces between the a-c and a-d subunits.
   Two recent X-ray structures of bacterial homologues from the same family of pentameric
ligand-gated ion channels have conﬁrmed the overall molecular architecture and provided higher
resolution details. In the ﬁrst case (Hilf & Dutzler, 2008), the structure of ELIC (Erwinia chry-
santhemi ligand-gated ion channel) appears to represent a closed channel though the ligand that
opens it is unknown (Fig. 3 b). In the second case (Bocquet et al. 2009 ; Hilf & Dutzler, 2009), the
structure of GLIC (Gloebacter violaceous ligand-gated ion channel) has been solved by two inde-
pendent groups simultaneously and appears to show an open channel conformation (Fig. 3 c). In
GLIC, the ligand is believed to be a hydrogen ion that may protonate an aspartate side chain in
the extracellular domain leading to channel opening. By comparing the GLIC and ELIC struc-
tures, the authors suggest that channel opening may occur by a combined tilting of both M3 and
central M2 helix by 9x so that the intracellular end of M2 enlarges the channel diameter from
essentially zero (closed) to about 5 Å (open).

2.3 Hexameric ion channels
In multicellular organisms, exchange of small molecules such as ions, metabolites and nucleotides
between neighbouring cells can be mediated through specialised channels called gap junctions.
Each gap junction complex consists of two hemichannels, called connexons, that interact end to
end to form a continuous channel thereby connecting the cytoplasm of two cells and bypassing
                                                                                                                                                                         74
                                                                                                                                                                         K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson
                                           (a)                                       (b)                                      (c)
Fig. 3. Pentameric ligand-gated channels, side view of full-length protein and top view of TM domain only: (a) AchR (2BG9), (b) ELIC (2VL0) and (c) GLIC (3EAM).
Ligand-gated channels are non-selective cation channels that form homo or hetero pentamers. Each subunit in the ﬁgure is coloured individually. In contrast the major
                                                                                                                                          [Figure 3 caption continued]
                                                                 Structures of membrane proteins         75

the extracellular space. Each connexon consists of six monomers of the protein connexin. Based
on sequence homology, human connexins have been classiﬁed into three isoforms (a,b,c) that
give unique properties to a particular gap junction. Gating by voltage, calcium, pH or phos-
phorylation has been observed in gap junctions (Harris, 2001). The physiological function of
Ca2+ or H+ gating may be to protect undamaged cells from neighbouring cells that suﬀer damage
and are dying.
    Each connexin monomer has four TM helices, two extracellular loops, one cytoplasmic loop,
an N-terminal helix and a C-terminal segment. The structure of human connexin 26 gap junction
reveals a 38-Å thick membrane region with TM2 extending y19 Å into the cytoplasm (Maeda
et al. 2009). The extracellular region extends 23 Å from the membrane surface and interacts with
a connexon from the opposing cell, resulting in an intercellular gap of y40 Å. The resolution of
the density map was not good enough by itself to allow unambiguous interpretation of the
structure, so the location of selenomethionine labels was needed to build the model. Helices
TM1 and TM2 face the interior of the pore while TM3 and TM4 face the exterior (Fig. 4). This
condradicts an earlier hypothetical model based on a 3D map of connexin from 2D crystals plus
other considerations, which placed TM1 and TM3 facing the interior of the pore (Unger et al.
1999 ; Fleishman et al. 2004). However, it should be emphasised that the experimental maps
obtained by electron microscopy of 2D crystals and X-ray diﬀraction of 3D crystals are virtually
identical and that some of the surface loops were unresolved in both maps, so the current
structure should probably still be considered as provisional.
    Like in many channels, a proline residue introduces a kink at the midpoint of TM2 and a
mutation of this residue results in aberrant gating. The major pore-lining helix TM1 is tilted
outwards from the pore axis, resulting in narrowing of the channel towards the extracellular side
of the membrane. A prominent feature in TM3 is the occurrence of an aromatic residue every
third or fourth position. Although TM3 is least conserved in connexins, aromatic residues are
involved in interactions between adjacent protomers. The diameter of the pore is widest at the
cytoplasmic entrance measuring 40 Å but narrows to 14 Å near the extracellular membrane
surface. The width of the channel increases again in the extracellular space to 25 Å. The cyto-
plasmic entrance formed mainly by TM2 and TM3 exposes many positively charged residues that
should concentrate negatively charged molecules. The N-terminal helix forms a constriction on
the cytoplasmic side and may play a role in selectivity. In the present structure, residues from the
N-terminal helix interact with residues from neighbouring monomers and probably help to
maintain the channel in an open state.
    The extracellular loops E1, E2 and the extracellular halves of TM2 and TM4 mediate the
interaction between two connexons. A most important requirement of this intercellular junction

[Figure 3 caption continued]
voltage-gated channels are tetrameric (shown in Fig. 2) and are selectively permeable to K+ or Na+ ions. In
higher organisms, ligand-gated channels play a major role in signalling, the best-known example being the
acetylcholine receptor (AChR) in the neuromuscular junction. The recent identiﬁcation of prokaryotic
pentameric ligand-gated channels (ELIC and GLIC) through genomic homology searches has allowed the
determination of two high-resolution X-ray structures but their physiological function remains to be elu-
cidated. Each subunit of all channels in this family has four TM helices. A large extracellular domain binds
the ligand, acetylcholine in AChR, protons in GLIC and unknown in ELIC. In AChR, the pentamer
composition is a2bcd-subunits with only the two a-subunits binding the ligand. Structures of AChR
determined by EM and ELIC by X-ray crystallography reﬂect the closed state of channel, while GLIC
crystallised at low pH is probably an open state of the channel. The outward tilting of the inner helices in
GLIC, proposed as the basis of channel opening, can be seen in the top view.
76     K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




                                    (a)                                         (b)

Fig. 4. Gap junction (2ZW3) : (a) side view of complete gap junction and (b) top view (from cytoplasm) of a
hemichannel. Gap junctions are made up of connexin monomers that assemble into hexameric rings called
connexons. A complete structure of a gap junction consists of two apposed connexons mediated by strong
interactions between the extracellular domains and a continuous open channel that connects the cytoplasm
of adjacent cells. A connexin monomer [highlighted in colour in the side view (a)] has four TM helices with
surface loops connecting them. TM1 (dark blue) and TM2 (light blue) form the wall of the pore. TM3 and
TM4 (light orange) form the outer helices. The extracellular loops 1 and 2 (aquamarine) form most of
the interactions between the two interacting connexons and seal the junction from the extracellular
environment. The putative voltage sensing N-terminal helix is shown in salmon.



is to prevent leakage of any cellular material from intracellular to extracellular compartments.
E1 contains a 310 helix at its N-terminus and a short helix at its C-terminus while E2 has a ﬂexible
N-terminus and a C-terminal half with a 310 turn. The N-terminal half of loop E1 forms the inner
wall of an extracellular cavity. b-strands from E1 and E2 form an antiparallel b-sheet that covers
E1 and the extracellular cavity, thereby forming an outer wall. There are a number of interactions
involved between the E1 and E2 loops from one hemichannel and the same loops from the
opposite hemichannel resulting in a tightly sealed junction. The position of the N-terminal helix
and earlier electron crystallographic studies has led to the proposal that it could act as a plug
(Oshima et al. 2007).


2.4 Trimeric ion channels
Exclusively found (so far) in higher eukaryotes are cation selective, voltage-independent, ligand
gated trimeric ion channels with two TM helices and a large extracellular domain inserted be-
tween them. This architecture is quite diﬀerent from the tetrameric potassium channels or the
pentameric ligand-gated channels. Two families of trimeric ion channels include the degenerin/
epithelial sodium channel (DEG/ENaC) and the P2X receptors. The DEG/ENaC family in-
cludes the peptide-gated channels of molluscs, touch sensitive degenerins of Caenorhabditis elegans,
constitutively open channels in lung and kidney epithelia involved in Na+ reabsorption, and acid
sensing ion channels (ASICs) found in the nervous system. The N and C-termini of the protein
are cytoplasmic and mediate protein-protein interactions (Bianchi & Driscoll, 2002 ; Wemmie
                                                             Structures of membrane proteins      77

et al. 2006) ; some of members of this family have been implicated in mechanotransduction.
Proteins from DEG/ENaC family show higher selectivity for sodium than other cations.
Proteins with similar architecture but unrelated to DEG/ENaC family are the P2X receptors
found both in pre and post-synaptic neurons of the central nervous system. In post-synaptic
neurons, extracellular ATP acts as a ligand to open a non-selective cation permeable channel. In
aﬀerent neurons of the peripheral nervous system, the P2X receptors are involved in sensing
taste and pain. In both these families, as one would expect, the largest variations are observed in
the extracellular domains, which have evolved to bind diﬀerent ligands. Unlike in the other families
of ion channels, lack of homologous proteins in prokaryotes meant the structure of trimeric
channels had to be determined from eukaryotic sources. Two structures, chicken ASIC of the
DEG/ENaC family ( Jasti et al. 2007; Gonzales et al. 2009) and zebraﬁsh P2X4 (Kawate et al.
2009) have been determined to reveal a similar architecture and some common principles.


2.4.1 Acid sensing ion channels
Six isoforms of ASICs (1a, 1b, 2a, 2b, 3 and 4) have been identiﬁed in mammals and are
distributed both in the central and peripheral nervous system where a drop in extracellular pH
can activate these channels (Krishtal, 2003 ; Wemmie et al. 2006). Two X-ray structures of ASIC1
from chicken have been determined that diﬀer in terms of the construct used and their functional
state ( Jasti et al. 2007 ; Gonzales et al. 2009). The pH of half maximal activation of chicken ASCI
is 67, and it desensitises upon prolonged exposure to low pH. The ﬁrst structure of chicken
ASCI lacks the ﬁrst 25 and last 64 residues at the N- and C-terminus, respectively, and does not
produce proton-induced currents. Since the crystals were grown at pH 56, it is thought to
represent a closed desensitised state of a non-functional channel ( Jasti et al. 2007). The construct
used for the second structure includes all the residues at the N-terminus intact but lacks 61
residues at the C-terminus (Gonzales et al. 2009). This construct does elicit proton-induced
currents and sodium selectivity. Thus, the structure, solved at pH 65, has been described as a
desensitised state of a functional channel.
   The extracellular domains of the two structures are identical and reveal interesting features.
Three large b-sheets from each subunit form the core of the extracellular domain, which is then
surrounded by a mixture of a and b structures. The salient feature of the extracellular domain in
the DEG/ENaC family is the presence of conserved cysteine rich regions. A total of seven
disulphide bonds are found. Of these, ﬁve are arranged in a straight line terminating at a con-
served tryptophan residue located at the junction between the TM and extracellular domains.
Two b-strands connect the TM domain to the extracellular domain and well-deﬁned loops are
found at the membrane interface. The extracellular domain is ﬁlled with many crevices and
cavities that might interact with other proteins. In ASICs, the ligands are protons. An acidic
pocket found 45 Å away from the membrane in the extracellular domain might act as a pH
sensor. It is speculated that this cysteine rich domain conveys the proton-induced conforma-
tional change of the extracellular domain to the TM domain through loops at the membrane
interface, resulting in opening or closing of the channel. The extracellular domain has vestibules
with a negative potential that can act as a reservoir for cations. In the current structures there is
no continuous pore along the threefold axis to the TM domain but ions are thought to access the
pore through fenestrations near the membrane surface.
   As expected for a cation-selective channel the interior of the TM domain has a negative
potential. Residues from TM2 primarily provide the pore lining, but a few residues from TM1
78     K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




                                (a)                               (b)
Fig. 5. Trimeric ion channels : (a) ASIC (3HGC), (b) P2X receptor (3H9V). Trimeric ion channels have thus
far been found only in eukaryotes. Acid sensing ion channels (ASICs) and P2X receptors belong to the
family of voltage-independent, ligand-gated cation channels. In contrast to the pentameric ligand-gated ion
channels, ASIC and P2X receptor are trimeric. They have the commonly found architecture of two TM
helices (blue, yellow and green) connected to a large extracellular domain (light green) that binds ligand.
One salient feature in the extracellular domain of both these channels is the presence of a large number of
cysteines that form disulphide bonds (red sticks), which is postulated to provide rigidity during con-
formational change upon ligand binding. The ligand in the case of ASCI is a proton, and for P2X it is ATP.
The structures of ASIC and P2X receptor represent the closed states of the trimeric ion channels, since they
have been crystallised at low pH and in the absence of ATP, respectively.


line the extracellular side of the pore. A conserved Gly–Ala–Ser motif is thought to play a crucial
role in ion selectivity. The TM domains in the two structures of ASCI show substantial diﬀer-
ences ( Jasti et al. 2007 ; Gonzales et al. 2009). In the ﬁrst structure, the TM domains in each of the
three subunits diﬀer in their conformation. The TM2 helices of two of the subunits have a
substantial kink at a glycine residue while the helix in the third subunit is relatively straight. The
packing of helices results in a V-shaped structure that opens to the extracellular side (Fig. 5 a). As
a result of the kinks, two TM2 helices cause leucine side chains to occlude the pore and no bound
ions are found in the pore, hence this structure is called a closed state of the channel. In the
second structure, the TM domains of all three subunits are identical. TM1 probably interacts with
the lipids that cover TM2. The inner TM2 helix is tilted y50x and the three TM2 helices cross
each other halfway from the putative membrane boundary. Such an arrangement of TM helices
results in wide extracellular and cytoplasmic regions with a narrow constriction at the middle of
the pore. However, the leucine residues no longer occlude the pore (Fig. 5 b), but aspartates from
all three helices contribute to a constriction on the extracellular side. Soaking with caesium ions
reveals an elongated density at this extracellular vestibule coordinated by aspartate and glycine.
Does this represent a diﬀerent conformation of the channel ? It should be noted that the crystal
packing in the two structures is diﬀerent. In the ﬁrst structure, the TM domains mediate the
interaction between layers of the extracellular domain: this crystal contact may ﬁx the TM
domains, which may then show a misleading conformational state of the channel. The presence
                                                            Structures of membrane proteins      79

of additional residues at the N-termini in the second structure probably blocks this interaction. It
is therefore possible that the ﬁrst structure has been perturbed by the detergent environment and
crystal contacts ( Jasti et al. 2007). In the light of a complementary structure of P2X receptor
(discussed below), the second structure of ASCI (Gonzales et al. 2009) probably represents the
functional desensitised state of the channel.


2.4.2 P2X4 Receptor
The concept of ATP as a signalling molecule was initially controversial. However, studies in
sensory neurons revealed purinergic signalling to be a more common mechanism than previously
thought. ATP synthesised in mitochondria is exported to the cytoplasm and then released to the
extracellular space by membrane proteins that could either be channels or transporters. Extra-
cellular ATP can either be hydrolyzed by extracellular enzymes or bind to one of many receptors
that include the ionotropic P2X receptors (Schwiebert & Zsembery, 2003). Seven diﬀerent
subtypes have been found which can mix and match to form homo- and heteromeric receptors.
Like many other membrane proteins P2X receptors, when overexpressed and puriﬁed, have a
tendency to aggregate. Structure determination involved screening many diﬀerent orthologues
and successfully produced the structure of zebraﬁsh P2X4 receptor (Kawate et al. 2009).
   The extracellular domain of P2X4 receptor has a central rigid ‘ body ’ domain with a
transthyretin-like b-sandwich motif around which other small domains are located (Fig. 5 b). The
upper region of this central domain makes contact with adjacent subunits while the lower region
is devoid of any contact and is linked to the TM domain. The head domain, with a fold similar to
oligosaccharide binding protein, is made up of three antiparallel b-strands and an a-helix that is
located above the body domain. Other domains include the dorsal ﬁn, and the right and left
ﬂipper. Numerous interactions are found between the body–body domains, head–body domains
and the left ﬂipper and dorsal ﬁn of neighbouring subunits. It is speculated that such interactions
between subdomains of the extracellular domain may play a role in the physiological properties
and assembly of the P2X receptor subtypes. The present structure has been determined in the
absence of agonist but, based on mutagenesis and the previously known ATP-binding site, an
ATP binding motif has been proposed. Common features of P2X4 and ASCI extracellular do-
mains include the presence of fenestrations at the membrane interface through which ions can
pass, vestibules with acidic residues to hold cations and ﬁve disulphides that are also found in the
extracellular domain of P2X4.
   The TM domain of P2X4 has a similar architecture to the desensitised structure of functional
ASCI (Gonzales et al. 2009 ; Kawate et al. 2009). In particular, the TM helices of P2X4 are
antiparallel with an angle of 45x to membrane normal. The TM2 helices of the three monomers
cross each other in the middle of the putative bilayer constricting the pore and are encircled by
TM1. Comparison of the structures of P2X4 and ASCI also reveals a common principle on
gating. The crossing of TM2 helices in both channels and the residues surrounding the con-
striction show some conservation but there must still be diﬀerences in the pores, since P2X4
channels are non-selective while ASCI channels are sodium selective.


2.5 Viral ion channels
Short peptides such as alamethicin and gramicidins that are synthesised non-ribosomally by
multi-domain peptidyl synthases can form simple channels with antibacterial properties (Koglin
80    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

& Walsh, 2009). Some enveloped viruses also encode very small TM proteins that form channels
and play a crucial role in their lifecycle. Proteins such as the M2 channel of inﬂuenza A virus, the
Vpu channel of human immunodeﬁciency virus and the Kcv channel of algal chlorella virus
PBCV-1 are y100 amino acids in length and have been shown to function as channels (Fischer
& Sansom, 2002). The M2 channel of inﬂuenza A is the best characterised of these and forms a
pH-gated proton channel. The infective cycle of inﬂuenza starts with the fusion of viral and host
cell membranes. Endocytosis of the intact virus is followed by acidiﬁcation within endosomes by
cellular ATPases. The subsequent fusion of viral and endosomal membrane is mediated by an
acid-induced conformational change in haemagglutinin that requires a change in the internal pH
of the virion. The M2 channel is responsible for this change in pH, which allows the release of
viral RNA into host cell. Drugs based on amantadine inhibit the pH change triggered by the M2
channel by inhibiting channel opening, but drug resistant mutants are on the increase.
   Structures of the M2 channel have been determined by X-ray crystallography and NMR
spectroscopy (Schnell & Chou, 2008 ; Stouﬀer et al. 2008). Neither of these structures is of a
full-length protein. A short peptide corresponding to the TM region has been used for crystal-
lography and a slightly longer version was used for NMR. Both structures reveal a tetrameric left-
handed helical bundle. A narrow pore lined by hydroxyl and carbonyl groups from conserved
residues is located at the N-terminus of the channel and is suggested to act as a solvent-ﬁlled path
for proton transfer. Just below this pore region, the M2 channel is constricted by valine and then
opens into an aqueous cavity lined by small residues. In the middle of the pore, a conserved
histidine that acts as a pH sensor is in close contact with a tryptophan that is thought to act as a
gate. Lower pH results in electrostatic repulsion of histidines and opening of the gate. The major
diﬀerence between the X-ray and NMR structures is the mode of drug binding. In the X-ray
structure a single drug molecule, amantidine, binds in the pore and blocks the channel. However,
in the NMR structure four rimantadine drug molecules are found in the C-terminal region of the
pore facing the bilayer, giving rise to speculation that the drugs may act by inhibiting the opening
probability of the channel rather than directly blocking of the pore. Although both structures
appear to be consistent with the mechanism of inhibition, with the drug-resistant mutations
observed in the virus and with other biochemical observations, it is unclear if they reﬂect the true
nature of the M2 channel since neither structure represents the full-length protein nor is their
environment native. Hence there is always the possibility that detergent has perturbed their
structures. Nevertheless, these structures represent a minimal ion channel.


2.6 Mechanosensitive channels
The ability of cells to sense a mechanical stimulus is achieved through specialised membrane
proteins called mechanosensitive (MS) channels. In prokaryotes these mechanosensitive channels
are used to respond to forces created by osmotic changes in the environment. In hyperosmotic
conditions, accumulation of various solutes by dedicated transport systems oﬀsets the eﬄux of
water. In low osmotic conditions however, the inﬂux of water generates a large turgor pressure
that could potentially rupture the cell. MS channels in these cells act as safety valves and provide
a quick defence against osmotic down shock by directly sensing the pressure from the lipid
bilayer (Kung, 2005). Homologues of prokaryotic MS channels are found in other cell-walled
organisms such as fungi and plants. Much of our understanding of MS channels comes from
studies in Escherichia coli. This bacterium possesses four MS channels : MscL (large conductance),
MscS (small conductance), MscM (mini conductance) and MscK (regulated by potassium
                                                             Structures of membrane proteins       81

concentration) (Perozo & Rees, 2003). The presence of diﬀerent MS channels allows the bac-
terium to respond to osmotic challenges of diﬀerent magnitude. For example, MscL is activated
close to the lytic limit of the lipid bilayer, while MscS is activated at slightly lower tension. MscL
and MscS have been well-studied biochemically as well as structurally while much less is known
about MscM and MscK.


2.6.1 Mechanosensitive channel, large
The crystal structure of MscL from Mycobacterium tuberculosis in a closed state reveals an oligomer
of ﬁve subunits each with two TM helices and a C-terminal cytoplasmic domain (Chang et al.
1998 ; Steinbacher et al. 2007). The pore forming TM1 helix is a tightly packed, right-handed
a-helical bundle (Fig. 6 a). It narrows towards the cytoplasm forming a hydrophobic constriction
that could perform the role of a gate. TM2 wraps around the central TM1 and probably interacts
with lipids on the outside. Each TM1 helix has four neighbours, consisting of two adjacent TM1s
plus TM2 helices of its own and a neighbouring subunit. The periplasmic side of the pore helix
TM1 is lined with polar residues. Although these are not conserved among the homologues,
polar residues are always positioned along the permeation pathway. No interaction is observed
between TM2 helices of adjacent subunits, which are presumably separated by lipid, and this
loose packing might facilitate the necessary conformational change required during channel
opening. A conserved amino acid stretch at the N-terminus adopts a helical conformation that is
located near the surface of the membrane, inserting into a gap between TM1 and TM2 of
neighbouring subunits. This short helix has been shown to play a role in MscL gating (Anishkin
et al. 2005). The cytoplasmic C-terminal domain forms a left-handed helical bundle, which may
act as a solute size pre-ﬁlter.
   The recent structure of the MscL channel from Staphylococcus aureus reveals a tetramer, with two
TM helices in each monomer (Liu et al. 2009). It was essential to delete last 26 residues at the
C-terminus to obtain crystals. The polypeptide conformation is slightly diﬀerent from that in the
MscL pentamer from M. tuberculosis. This structure of S. aureus MscL channel is thought to be in
an intermediate expanded state when compared to the closed channel of M. tuberculosis. It is not
obvious why these channels have diﬀerent oligomeric structures.


2.6.2 Mechanosensitive channel, small
The crystal structure of from E. coli shows a heptamer with three TM helices and a large
cytoplasmic domain in each subunit (Bass et al. 2002 ; Steinbacher et al. 2007). As opposed to
MscL where both ends of the polypeptide are cytoplasmic, the N-terminus of MscS starts in the
periplasm, followed by TM1 and TM2 that form outer helices enclosing the pore forming TM3
helices whose C-termini end in the cytoplasm (Fig. 6 b). A glycine residue in TM3 produces a
pronounced kink resulting in the C-terminus of TM3 being oriented nearly parallel to the
membrane. TM3 interacts with symmetry related partners to form the permeation pathway. The
N-terminus of TM3 is largely hydrophobic ; of signiﬁcant importance are the side chains of two
leucine residues that block the pore. Thus, the permeation pathway in the observed structure is
devoid of water and cannot pass ions; hence the structure of MscS probably reﬂects the closed
state (Anishkin & Sukharev, 2004). TM1 and TM2 within a subunit are antiparallel and show
weak electron density possibly indicating their mobile nature. Two arginines found in TM1 and
TM2 could explain the voltage modulation observed in single-channel recordings of MscS. The
                                                                                                                                                                           82
                                                                                                                                                                           K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson
                                    (a)                                       (b)                                        (c)
Fig. 6. Molecular architecture of prokaryotic mechanosensitive channels, side and top view : (a) MscL, closed (2OAR), (b) MscS, closed (2OAU), (c) MscS, open (2VV5).
MscL and MscS are non-selective channels, activated in response to hypo-osmotic shock. MscL and MscS show unusually large conductances of 3 and 1 nS, respectively,
                                                                                                                                            [Figure 6 caption continued]
                                                                   Structures of membrane proteins          83

cytoplasmic region of MscS is fairly large and consists of two domains : a middle b-domain,
where ﬁve short b-strands from each subunit pack together to form a continuous (35-stranded)
b-sheet extending around the entire protein and a C-terminal domain that has mixed a/b
structure. The C-terminal domain consists of a b-barrel formed by a single b-strand from each
subunit, which is then surrounded by two a-helices that are packed against a three-stranded
antiparallel b-sheet. The pore of MscS in the bilayer is accessible through seven openings each of
14 Å diameter formed by the cytoplasmic domains. An eighth opening passes through the centre
of the C-terminal b-barrel, with a diameter of 8 Å. Such an intricate structure for the cytoplasmic
domain may act as a pre-ﬁltering device to limit the size of solutes that exit the cell during
osmotic downshock.

2.6.3 Gating of MscL and MscS
Gating of both MscL and MscS is a complex process. Both channels are thought to exist in
closed, open and inactive states. They also exhibit numerous subconductance states indicating
multiple conformations. The response of MscS to changes in the voltage across the membrane
in addition to membrane tension and its tendency to inactivate when the membrane tension
increases slowly adds additional complexity (Akitake et al. 2005). In a biological context, the
diﬀerent gating behaviour of MscL and MscS has probably evolved for diﬀerent conditions of
stress. MscS opens when there is a small downshift in osmolarity and then inactivates once the
turgor pressure is no longer threatening. MscL opens close to the lytic limit of membrane, so
probably acts as a last resort when all other systems have failed.
   Gating of MscL and MscS has been studied by techniques such as patch clamp and site-
directed spin labelling with electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) (Perozo et al. 2002a ; Akitake
et al. 2005, 2007 ; Vasquez et al. 2008). Diﬀerent properties of lipids such as the chain length,
intrinsic curvature of the membrane leaﬂet and ﬂuidity of the membrane have been analysed with
regard to their eﬀects on gating of MS channels. Chain length and ﬂuidity aﬀect the threshold
tension required to activate the channels, but do not trigger a conformational change. Addition
of amphipathic molecules such as lysophosphatidyl choline (LPC) spontaneously opens the
MS channels even in the absence of applied pressure indicating that lateral pressure mediated
by lipids has a direct eﬀect on the probability of channel opening (Perozo et al. 2002b).

[Figure 6 caption continued]
which are much larger conductances than found in ion-selective channels because they make very large
transient holes in the membrane. Although they carry out similar functions, the structures of these proteins
are remarkably diﬀerent indicating separate evolutionary pathways. MscL is a pentamer with two TM helices
in each subunit, while MscS is a heptamer with three TM helices per monomer. One subunit in each channel
is coloured in rainbow, blue at the N-terminus and red at the C-terminus. Despite their diﬀerences in
oligomeric state, both proteins show a ring of single TM helices tightly packed to form the permeation
pathway and covered by loosely packed outer helices. There is little sequence conservation between the pore
forming helices of these two families of proteins. However, there is a striking common feature in the central
helices of the two channels. When TM1 of MscL and TM3 of MscS are compared, there is a conserved
pattern of alanine and glycine residues that allow tight packing of the pore forming helices, with interspersed
hydrophobic residues that form the constriction pathway when the channels are closed. The presence of
small amino acids in these helices must play a pivotal role in facilitating structural changes during gating.
Indeed, the open structure of MscS shows a large rotation and tilting of helices, which results in the increase
of pore diameter from 48 Å in the closed state to y13 Å in the open state. Cross-linking and site-directed
spin labelling studies indicate that MscL probably undergoes a similar conformational change to open the
permeation pathway, creating a pore diameter of y25 Å.
84    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

   Recently, the crystal structure of an open conformation of MscS was obtained by mutating
a single residue (from alanine to valine, A106V) near the N-terminus of TM3 helix (Wang et al.
2008). In the closed MscS structure, this alanine packs against a glycine, G108, from a neigh-
bouring subunit, but the presence of the bulkier valine must interfere with this interaction. Large
changes are seen when the open structure is compared to the closed structure. The outer helices
TM1 and TM2 are rotated by y45x clockwise and are accompanied by a 15x tilt with respect to
the seven fold axis in the open state compared with the closed state. In addition, the N-terminus
of the pore forming helix TM3 is rotated by 15x clockwise while the C-terminus remains largely
unchanged (Fig. 6 c). Stabilisation of the open state is thought to occur through an interaction
between the TM1-TM2 loops and both the C-terminus of TM3 of the same subunit and the
N-terminus of TM3 of the neighbouring subunit. This change in tilt and rotation of the helices
results in an y8-Å increase of pore diameter upon channel opening to produce a pore with a
diameter of y13 Å. Such an increase in pore diameter by movement of helices has also been
observed by site-directed spin labelling in liposomes, indicating that the open structure of MscS
is not an artefact of detergent and crystallisation (Vasquez et al. 2008). However, although the
indirect deductions about solvent accessibility derived from modelling based on the site-directed
spin labelling results agree well with the X-ray crystal structure observations for TM3, they do
not agree for the other helices. Fig. 6 is therefore not the last word on the topic. Recent
computational studies predict that the structure of the A106V mutant is a partially open state
(Anishkin & Sukharev, 2009).
   There is no structure yet for an open conformation of a pentameric MscL but experiments by
site-directed spin labelling, and by mutational and cross-linking analysis has allowed construction
of a working model for its open state. As in MscS, tilting of both TM1 and TM2 helices are
proposed, resulting in an increase of pore diameter to y25 Å with only the pore forming TM1
helix, and not the outer TM2 helix, becoming exposed to the aqueous channel (Perozo et al.
2002a). Despite the diﬀerences in the structure and gating behaviour, opening of the permeation
pathway of both MscL and MscS can be explained by helix tilting. This is analogous to opening
the iris in a camera, a mechanism that was proposed earlier based on cross-linking analysis and
computational modelling (Sukharev et al. 2001). The essence of MS channel function lies in their
ability to sense the pressure through the lipid bilayer. Hence it is surprising to learn that there is
no structure yet of either MscL or MscS in lipid bilayers. It would be of great interest to see how
the outer helices pack against lipids. A 3D crystal with a lipid bilayer would also provide an
opportunity to study the eﬀect of lateral pressure in situ and subsequent channel opening.


2.6.4 Eukaryotic MS channels
MS channels in animals reside in specialized organs such as the ear (hearing) and skin (touch) that
detect mechanical stimuli and convert them into electrical signals, a process that has been termed
‘ mechanotransduction ’ (Gillespie & Walker, 2001 ; Kung, 2005 ; Sukharev & Corey, 2004). Many
biological process such as the twitching of nematode worms when touched, the response of plant
roots and shoots to gravity, the determination of systemic osmolarity by circumventricular
organs, or the sensing of blood pressure by baroreceptors in animals are all a result of mech-
anotransduction. MS channels respond to mechanical stimulus such as deformation of skin or
oscillation of hair cells in hair bundles by rapid opening of the channels, resulting in a ﬂow of ions
that ampliﬁes the signal. MS channels in eukaryotes interact with other proteins to form a mech-
anotransduction apparatus such as the ‘ mec ’ system of C. elegans (Chalﬁe, 1997 ; Tavernarakis &
                                                               Structures of membrane proteins        85

Driscoll, 1997). They are tethered to the extracellular matrix on one side and to the cytoskeleton
in the cytoplasm, which allows the direct transfer of the signal and removes the need for sec-
ondary messengers. Some of the major membrane protein families in higher eukaryotes including
the degenerin (DEG/ENaC) family, transient receptor potential (TRP) family and the two-pore
domain K+-channel family have been proposed to be involved in mechanosensation (Gillespie
& Walker, 2001; Sukharev & Corey, 2004 ; Kung, 2005). The ASIC ion channels described in
section 2.4 belong to the degenerin family, but there is no clear experimental evidence yet on
whether they respond to mechanical stimuli. However, sequence homology and topological
prediction of TM domains indicates that eukaryotic MS channels, for which there are no struc-
tures yet, may have a similar architecture to ASIC and share some gating properties with pro-
karyotic MS channels.


2.7 Aquaporins
Most biological membranes allow water transport by simple diﬀusion. However, the presence of
speciﬁc water channels is crucial for many biological processes such as renal reabsorption, gen-
eration of aqueous humour in the eyes, secretion of sweat, saliva and tears, and regulation of
cellular osmolarity in microbes and plants (Engel & Stahlberg, 2002 ; King et al. 2004). Hence, it is
not surprising that one or more water channels, called ‘ aquaporins’, are found in most organ-
isms, principally to maintain water homeostasis. The 2003 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded
to Peter Agre for his role in discovering these channels (Agre, 2004). Similar small molecules
such as glycerol and urea are also transported through speciﬁc channels. Channels that transport
glycerol as well as water are called aquaglyceroporins (Gonen & Walz, 2006) and show structural
homology.
   Since most ions are hydrated, an important function of water channels is to exclude passage
of ions, especially protons, which would quickly short-circuit the electrochemical membrane
potential. A continuous chain of hydrogen bonded water molecules can be an excellent proton
pathway (de Grotthuss, 1806). If aquaporins allowed proton permeation, there would be cellular
acidiﬁcation and collapse of the membrane potential. Thus, a water channel should have a
mechanism to exclude protons while retaining the selectivity for a high ﬂux (3r109 molecules/s)
of water or similar molecules. This has been achieved in the aquaporin family by the juxta-
position of two short highly conserved sequences, both containing an asparagine–proline–
alanine (NPA) motif, which together form the heart of the pore.
   To date, 10 diﬀerent aquaporin structures have been determined to high-resolution by X-ray
or electron crystallography (Sui et al. 2001 ; Fu et al. 2000 ; Murata et al. 2000 ; Savage et al. 2003 ;
Gonen et al. 2004b ; Harries et al. 2004 ; Lee et al. 2005 ; Hiroaki et al. 2006 ; Tornroth-Horseﬁeld
et al. 2006 ; Horseﬁeld et al. 2008 ; Newby et al. 2008 ; Fischer et al. 2009). Aquaporins exist as
tetramers in vitro as well as in vivo (Fig. 7 a). The key architectural feature of the molecule is an
internal duplication in which each half of the monomer consists of three TM helices and a re-
entrant loop. The two repeats are related by an approximate twofold axis in the membrane plane
giving the overall structure an unusual symmetry of inversion across the membrane. Each
monomer is thus made up of a right-handed bundle of six TM helices (1–6) connected by ﬁve
loops (A–E), which together form the channel. The two NPA motifs are located at the N-termini
of the re-entrant loops B and E, which fold into the protein from opposite sides to meet in the
middle of the bilayer. The C-terminal halves of these loops form short helices (HB and HE),
which are roughly aligned and together can be considered to form a kinked seventh TM helix
86     K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




                     (a)                                                        (b)




Fig. 7. (a) Tetramer of aquaporin (2B60). (top) Aqp0, determined by electron crystallography viewed from
the extracellular side, shows an individual water channel in each monomer with water molecules depicted as
red spheres. Lipids probably ﬁll the cavity at the centre of the tetramer. So far only in the structure of human
Aqp5, has an ordered lipid molecule been identiﬁed in this region (Horseﬁeld et al. 2008). (b) Monomer of
aquaporin showing how it has evolved by gene duplication. The N and C terminal halves (blue and green) of
each polypeptide are related by a pseudo twofold symmetry axis, which is parallel to the membrane plane
and perpendicular to the page. Thus, the two halves of the molecules have opposite orientations in the
membrane. Loop C (magenta) on the extracellular side connects the two halves. The conserved NPA motifs
and short helices (HB and HE) are depicted in yellow. Three water molecules (red spheres) as seen in the
EM structure of Aqp0 are shown along the pore region (Gonen et al. 2004b). The hourglass like structure of
aquaporin was predicted based on primary sequence and biochemical analysis years before the ﬁrst structure
was determined (Jung et al. 1994).

(Fig. 7 b) with a central discontinuity. Another conserved feature in the aquaporin family is the
aromatic/arginine (ar/R) constriction site, in which arginine and one or more aromatic residues
usually play a crucial role in selectivity and ion exclusion. Varying numbers of water molecules
(3–9) have been observed in the pore in diﬀerent structures, depending on the open or closed
state of the channel. Pore diameter at the entrance of a pure water channel is 3 Å, slightly larger
than a water molecule, while that of a glycerol channel is 38 Å.
   Substrate selectivity can be understood by comparing diﬀerent aquaporin structures.
Substitution of residues around the ar/R constriction site forms the basis of permeability and
selectivity. Pure water conducting channels such as Aqp1 and AqpZ have two charged residues
(arginine and histidine) along with a polar residue and a phenylalanine (Sui et al. 2001; Savage et al.
2003). In the homologous glycerol facilitator GlpF, histidine is replaced by glycine, phenylalanine
                                                              Structures of membrane proteins        87

by tyrosine and the polar residue by hydrophobic phenylalanine providing an environment that
accommodates glycerol. Thus, GlpF is highly permeable to glycerol but less so to water (Fu et al.
2000). Channels such as the archeal AqpM that conduct glycerol poorly in vitro tend to have an
aliphatic substitution for histidine (Lee et al. 2005).
    Based on the structure and subsequent molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, proton ex-
clusion is explained by a ‘ hydrogen bond isolation mechanism ’ (Murata et al. 2000 ; de Groot &
Grubmuller, 2001 ; Tajkhorshid et al. 2002). The side chains of the asparagines in the NPA motif
extend into the pore and the positive end of the dipole moments of the half helices are focused
on these amido groups. The oxygen lone pairs of the central water molecule accept hydrogen
bonds from the amide hydrogen atoms of the two asparagine side chains. This orients the two
hydrogens in the water molecule perpendicular to the pore axis, thereby preventing the form-
ation of hydrogen bonds with neighbouring water molecules and dividing the pore into halves,
ensuring that only water and not hydronium ions can bind to this central site. MD simulations
show that the lines of water molecules in the two halves of the pore have opposite hydrogen
bond polarity thereby preventing the passage of protons. It is interesting to note that mutation of
arginine in the ar/R constriction site is suﬃcient to allow some protons to leak through (Beitz
et al. 2006). Thus, the positive charge in the constriction site and the positive dipole at the centre
of the pore together form an electrostatic barrier for protons.
    Regulation of some aquaporins involves the loop regions. It is achieved at various levels by
pH, phosphorylation, calcium or hormones. Human aquaporins such as Aqp0, Aqp3 and Aqp6
have been shown to be pH sensitive. The lens-speciﬁc, junction-forming Aqp0 deserves special
mention because it undergoes channel closure by cleavage at the N-terminus, followed by a con-
formational change in residues lining the pore (Gonen et al. 2004a). A similar scenario is observed
in yeast aquaporin where the N-terminus of the molecule acts as a gate (Fischer et al. 2009).
Phosphorylation of conserved serine residues and protonation of histidine in plant aquaporin
SoPIP2 regulates the water conductance. The structure of SoPIP2 solved in open and closed
conformation revealed a role for loop D and helix 5 in water conductance (Tornroth-Horseﬁeld
et al. 2006).
    Aquaporins are one of the families of membrane protein whose structure has been determined
at high resolution both in detergent micelles and in lipid bilayers (Gonen et al. 2004b ; Harries et al.
2004). Although all aquaporins adopt the same fold, subtle diﬀerences observed in these structures
have increased our understanding of how the channels work. Questions remain about how some
aquaporins allow anion permeation and about the mechanisms behind regulation. Finally, there is
a very recent new structure of a formate transporter whose fold closely resembles aquaporin, yet
form a symmetric pentamer rather than a symmetric tetramer (Wang et al. 2009)


2.8 Ammonia channel
Assimilation of nitrogen is essential for all biological processes. Nitrogen can be taken up in dif-
ferent forms ranging from ammonia, nitrate and nitrite to atmospheric nitrogen. Most organisms
prefer ammonia since it can be directly assimilated into glutamine with the least energetic cost
while inorganic sources such as nitrate or nitrite need to be reduced before they can be incor-
porated into the metabolic pathway. In aqueous solution, ammonia (NH3) is a weak base that
exists in equilibrium with ammonium ions with a pKa of 925. Most biological membranes are
suﬃciently permeable to ammonia for growth of microbes but in an environment with low con-
centrations of ammonia, dedicated transport system have evolved to meet the needs of the cell
88     K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




                     (a)                                                   (b)
Fig. 8. Ammonia channel (1U7G). (a) Trimeric ammonia channel, viewed from the extracellular side,
showing an ammonium ion (red) at the periplasmic entrance and three ammonia molecules (yellow) in the
lumen. One monomer coloured as in (b) clearly shows the pseudo twofold symmetry. The trimer of the
ammonia channel is very stable even in the presence of SDS and tight packing between monomers is
possibly the reason why the crystals are so well ordered. Among the membrane protein structures known so
far, this eleven helical bundle is unique to the ammonia channel family. (b) Monomer of the ammonia
channel : Unlike the aquaporins, the sequence of AmtB does not reveal any hint of gene duplication, but the
structure shows that helices 1–5 (blue) and 6–10 (green) are related by pseudo twofold symmetry. Like
aquaporins the pseudo twofold axis lies in the membrane plane so that the two halves of the molecule have
opposite orientations in the membrane. Together they make the pore. Helix 11 (magenta) lies at a 45x angle
to the membrane and makes contact with both halves of the monomer.


(Khademi & Stroud, 2006). In prokaryotes and plants, these are called ammonia transporters
(Amt). In yeast, they are methylammonium permeases (MEPs) and, in animals, they include
the Rh family of proteins. Expression of Rh proteins is observed in many tissues such as liver,
kidney and skin and they play a major role in acid homeostasis by removing ammonia
from the blood (Ludewig, 2006). The whole family of ammonia channels is now known as
the Amt/MEP/Rh family.
   Crystal structures of the ammonium channel from E. coli (Khademi et al. 2004 ; Zheng et al.
2004), Archaeoglobus fulgidus (Andrade et al. 2005) and Nitrosomonas europaea (Lupo et al. 2007)
have been determined by X-ray crystallography (Fig. 8 a). Ammonium transporters form a
trimer with a separate pathway in each monomer for substrate transport. Each monomer
comprises 11 TM helices arranged in a right-handed a-helical bundle. Helices 1–5 and 6–10
                                                             Structures of membrane proteins      89

are related to each other by a pseudo twofold axis that lies in the membrane plane (Fig. 8 b),
giving rise to the same type of inverted symmetry as in the aquaporins. A long, straight
helix (TM11) lies at 45x to the membrane plane covering each monomer. TM1 from each
monomer packs tightly at the periplasmic/extracellular end of the threefold axis to seal the
passage while tapering towards the cytoplasmic end to leave an open pocket. The channel in each
monomer is hydrophobic with polar cytoplasmic and extracellular vestibules. The vestibules
at the extracellular side expose numerous carbonyl groups that help to attract ammonium ions
and water.
   Ammonia channels are functionally electroneutral. It was thought initially that ammonium
ions and protons were counter-transported. However, the structures show rather passive chan-
nels through which neutral ammonia is likely to pass. Structures solved in the presence of
ammonia or methylammonia reveal weak electron densities at four diﬀerent sites (Khademi et al.
2004). Only the ﬁrst site at the periplasmic entrance of the pore contains an ammonium ion while
the other three found in the lumen are occupied by ammonia. The entrance to the hydrophobic
channel is very narrow and constricted by two phenylalanines, a tryptophan and serine. An
incoming ammonium ion interacts with aromatic rings via cation-p interactions and hydrogen
bonds with a serine side chain. This interaction results in rotation of the indole ring of trypto-
phan, which exposes a buried aspartate. This conserved aspartate is thought to act as a proton
acceptor via water molecules and mutation of this residue renders the channel inactive. Two
phenylalanines act as gates to let ammonia through, but block extracellular solvent from the pore
(Lin et al. 2006).
   The lumen of the pore is y20 Å in length, devoid of any water molecules and lined pre-
dominantly by aliphatic non-polar side chains. The hydrophobic nature of the pore has been
conﬁrmed by solving the structure of AmtB in the presence of xenon, which shows two Xe
binding sites in the pore (Andrade et al. 2005). Two conserved histidines (His 168 and 318 in
E. coli AmtB) lie adjacent to the ammonia sites in the pore and are hydrogen bonded to one
another in the mid-membrane. Mutation to any other amino acid (except for H168E in E. coli,
which is partially active) abolishes conduction and so implies a speciﬁc role for these histidines in
transport ( Javelle et al. 2006). In the crystal structures, ammonia molecules form weak hydrogen
bonds to the histidines and such weak interactions may allow for rapid diﬀusion of the ammonia
molecules through the pore. On leaving the pore, ammonia is reprotonated at the cytoplasmic
side since its pKa is above 9. Water molecules are not transported and even in the absence of
ammonia, the crystal structures do not show any water molecules in the lumen (Khademi et al.
2004). By transporting neutral ammonia, the channels also exclude leakage of similar sized K+
ions which if permitted would aﬀect the membrane potential.
   In prokaryotes and plants, proteins belonging to the PII signal transduction family regulate
ammonia transport (Arcondeguy et al. 2001). Often, the ammonia transport gene is linked with its
regulator GlnK, a soluble trimeric protein that binds to the ammonia channel on its cytoplasmic
face and blocks transport (Conroy et al. 2007 ; Gruswitz et al. 2007). GlnK has a multi-functional
role since it can also bind to glutamate synthase, the prime acceptor of ammonia. In nitrogen
limiting conditions, the concentration of 2-oxoglutarate (2-KG) in the cell rises and binds to
GlnK in the presence of ATP and magnesium. This leads to the dissociation of GlnK from
Amt and opening of the channel. When intracellular nitrogen levels are relatively high, the
level of 2-KG drops and GlnK can now bind back to Amt, blocking ammonia uptake. The
trimeric architecture of Amt channel may have evolved to match the symmetry of the regulatory
proteins.
90    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

3. Active transport
Active transporters use energy for transporting molecules and ions against a concentration
gradient. They are classiﬁed as primary or secondary transporters (Mitchell, 1967). When the
source of energy is derived from ATP or light or redox energy, these transporters are called
primary transporters, which are predominantly involved in maintaining ion gradients across the
membrane. Secondary active transporters utilise the free energy stored in an electrochemical ion
gradient to drive the translocation of substrates against their concentration gradient. Primary and
secondary transport processes interact via the membrane potential. Thus, ion gradients generated
from chemical, redox or light energy are used in many diverse processes such as drug extrusion,
ﬂagellar rotation or metabolite transport. Most cells maintain electrochemical gradients of both
H+ and Na+ ions across the cytoplasmic membrane by primary or secondary ion translocation
processes. In many organisms, the proton motive force generated by substrate oxidation via the
respiratory chain is used to extrude Na+ from the cell by a Na+/H+ antiport mechanism, thereby
establishing an electrochemical Na+ gradient across the cytoplasmic membrane called ‘ smf ’
(sodium motive force). Alternatively, a variety of prokaryotic cells possess primary Na+ pumps
that can also generate smf.
   Both primary and secondary transporters can be classiﬁed into uniporters, symporters or anti-
porters based on the characteristics of substrate transport. The mechanism of translocation in all
these transporters can be explained by an alternating access mechanism where access to a ligand
binding site in the protein alternates between two sides of the membrane for uptake and re-
lease of substrate ( Jardetzky, 1966). Control of coupled reaction sequences in active transport
depends on sequential changes in the protein structure as the reaction proceeds. These
changes are brought about by speciﬁc interactions with the substrate, the binding forces being
used to stabilise a conformation with altered properties or a transition state between successive
conformations.


3.1 Primary transporters
3.1.1 P-type ATPase
Membrane proteins that are transiently phosphorylated as a key step in the transport cycle are
called P-type ATPases. They utilise chemical energy from the hydrolysis of ATP to pump ions
against a concentration gradient. In animal, plant and fungal cell membranes, P-type ATPases
play a major role in the generation of a membrane potential, which is subsequently used by ion
channels and secondary transporters. Other notable biological functions include the control of
cytoplasmic calcium concentrations by the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA) that is
involved in skeletal muscle contraction and acidiﬁcation of the stomach by the gastric H+/K+-
ATPase.
   P-type ATPases are distributed in all organisms and have been divided into ﬁve distinct classes
(Type I–V) based on sequence homology. They transport a wide range of common cations such
as H+, Na+, K+, Ca2+ and Mg2+ and also have roles in the eﬄux of heavy metals (Kuhlbrandt,
2004). All P-type ATPases have their cytoplasmic domains subdivided into phosphorylation (P),
nucleotide binding (N), and actuator (A) domains. The P domain forms the catalytic core with
a Rossmann fold, which harbours a conserved aspartate that becomes phosphorylated during the
transport cycle. The N domain is inserted within the P domain and is linked to it by a conserved
hinge of two antiparallel strands. The N domain is the least conserved of all three cytoplasmic
                                                                  Structures of membrane proteins          91




                       (a)                                          (b)
Fig. 9. Molecular architecture of P-type ATPases shown with the cytoplasmic active site at the bottom,
using the convention adopted throughout this review. (Note that in the P-type ATPase ﬁeld, the orientation
is normally inverted from that shown here). (a) Ca2+-ATPase (2ZBD) and (b) Na+/K+-ATPase (2ZXE).
The formation of an acid-stable phosphorylated intermediate during the transport cycle of this class of
membrane proteins gives rise to their name, P-type ATPase. All proteins in this family have three cyto-
plasmic domains, a nucleotide binding domain (green), a phosphorylation domain (yellow) and an actuator
domain (blue). The TM domain (brown) with 10 a-helices is the least conserved of all domains. The
b-subunit of Na+/K+-ATPase is shown in pink and the c-subunit (FXYD protein) in orange. The trans-
port cycle of P-type ATPases has been described by Post and Albers (Albers et al. 1963 ; Post et al. 1965) to
alternate between E1 and E2 states with diﬀerent aﬃnities for ions and nucleotides. Two representative
structures of Ca2+-ATPase and Na+/K+-ATPase show a general architecture preserved in P-type ATPases.
It has been possible to trap intermediates in the transport cycle by the use of transition state analogues and
inhibitors with ATPase. The E1P state of Ca2+ ATPase (a) with calcium ions (cyan) occluded within the
protein was obtained by the addition of AlFx                                                    +
                                             4 (aquamarine) and Mg.ADP (orange). In the Na /K -ATPase
                                                                                                     +

                                           2x
(b), when a phosphate mimic such as MgF4 (magenta) is crystallised with counterion potassium (purple), it
was possible to trap the pump in the ion-occluded E2 state. For a complete discussion of multiple structures
and conformational changes, see a recent review (Toyoshima, 2008).


domains. It has variable size and it is responsible for the delivery of phosphate from ATP to the
P domain. A conserved ‘ TGE ’ motif in the A domain plays a role both in the hydrolysis of
phosphate from the P domain aspartate and in the gating mechanism.
   The TM domain of P-type ATPases consists of as few as six TM helices (E. coli Kdp ATPase),
or eight in the case of heavy metal pumps but they more generally contain 10 TM helices (M1 to
M10). As one would expect, the TM domain is the least conserved region in the P-type ATPase
family since it has evolved to coordinate and transport a variety of ions of diﬀerent size and
charge (Fig. 9). The A domain is inserted between TM helices M2 and M3 while the P domain is
inserted between M4 and M5. In fact, helices M2 and M5 extend a long way from the membrane
92    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

and interact with the cytoplasmic domains. TM helices M7 to M10 play an anchoring role with a
specialised function in each subgroup. For example, in sodium pumps (Na+/K+-ATPase) they
interact with b- and c-subunits, although these additional subunits are absent in heavy metal
pumps. The overall architecture of P-type ATPases is well conserved as revealed from the crystal
structures of three diﬀerent classes namely Na+/K+-ATPase, H+-ATPase and Ca2+-ATPase
(Toyoshima et al. 2000 ; Morth et al. 2007 ; Pedersen et al. 2007 ; Shinoda et al. 2009). Even the TM
domains that show very little sequence homology have remarkably similar structures with dif-
ferences matched to their diﬀerent ion transport speciﬁcity. In the H+-ATPase, only a single
aspartate is found in the TM region, while the calcium and sodium pumps have multiple buried
acidic residues that coordinate the larger ions they transport. Of particular interest are helices in
all three ATPase structures that are partially unwound within the membrane-spanning region
(M4 and M6 in Ca2+-ATPase), exposing main chain carbonyl and amides that coordinate cations,
a recurring theme observed in many ion transport proteins. Such discontinuous helices create a
cavity that is designed to coordinate ions and associated solvating water molecules. The structure
of the Na+/K+-ATPase with its additional regulatory (b and c) subunits shows how the helices
M7 to M10 interact with other proteins (Fig. 9 b).
    Ion pumps have evolved to build ion gradients. Hence, it is crucial that pumps do not leak. It
is thought that pumps must have two gates that open alternately as opposed to a single gate in ion
channels. At any given time, only one of the ion pump gates is open. It is also possible that there
is an intermediate state in which both gates are closed and the ions are occluded at one point in
the transport cycle. Structural changes required to open and close the gates sequentially limit the
rate of ion transport to y100 ions/s as opposed to 107 ions/s in ion channels where the single
gate is either open or closed (Gadsby et al. 2009). The transport cycle of P-type ATPases follows
an alternating access mechanism that was described initially for the Na+/K+-ATPase. It is
known as the Post-Albers scheme (Albers et al. 1963 ; Post et al. 1965) but is applicable to all mem-
bers of the P-type ATPase family. The pump alternates between two conformations (E1 and E2)
with diﬀerent aﬃnities for ions and ATP. Binding of ion-1 (Na+ in the Na+/K+-ATPase) from
the cytoplasm to a high aﬃnity site in the E1-state stimulates phosphorylation of the pump by
ATP, resulting in an E1-P state in which the ion is occluded from both sides. Release of ADP
and a subsequent conformational change results in an E2-P state with reduced aﬃnity for ion-1
that is then released to the extracellular surface or vesicle lumen. The hydrolysis of phosphate is
stimulated when ion-2 binds to the site vacated by ion-1 (K+ in the Na+/K+-ATPase) resulting
in an ion occluded E2 state. The pump reverts back to the E1 state releasing ion-2 into the
cytoplasm. Apart from the plant and fungal plasma membrane H+-ATPases, which are elec-
trogenic and transport only protons, all other P-type ATPases transport counter-ions. The
number of ions transported per catalytic cycle diﬀers in each pump. Generally an asymmetry is
observed such as three Na+ for two K+ in the Na+/K+-ATPase or two Ca2+ for probably three
H+ in the Ca2+-ATPase, so there is a degree of electrogenicity in all P-type ATPases.
    Since the identiﬁcation of the sodium pump by Jens Skou (Skou, 1957), much of the structural
research on P-type ATPases has been dedicated to understanding the diﬀerent conformations of
the pumps as described in the Post-Albers scheme. The structure of the Ca2+-ATPase deter-
mined by X-ray crystallography revealed for the ﬁrst time the architecture of a P-type ATPase
(Toyoshima et al. 2000). Subsequently in the last few years as many as 22 structures of the
Ca2+-ATPase trapped with transition state analogues or inhibitors have provided us with an
almost complete picture of the transport cycle of a P-type ATPase (Toyoshima, 2008). Two
calcium-binding sites in the TM region (sites I and II) have been identiﬁed from the structure of
                                                            Structures of membrane proteins      93

the Ca2+-ATPase. Site II is located closer to the cytoplasmic face while site I is deeper within the
TM domain. Calcium binding shows co-operative behaviour. Ion binding at site I is essential for
converting site II into a high aﬃnity-binding site. The calcium binding in site I is coordinated by
side chain carbonyl groups and water while site II is made up mainly of main chain carbonyl
groups from the unwound TM helices with a single aspartate residue contributing to both sites.
   Comparison of multiple structures in diﬀerent states reveal that the cytoplasmic (P, N and A)
domains move as rigid bodies during the transport cycle communicating the phosphorylation
event in the P domain to the TM domain through the extended helices M2 and M5. Much of the
conformational change in the TM domain is centred on M5, which forms the backbone. While
the helices M7 to M10 remain unchanged, substantial movement is observed in M1 to M6.
Partially unwound helices remain so throughout the transport cycle. The aﬃnity of the calcium
binding sites is modulated by changes occurring in TM domains coupled to movements of the
cytoplasmic domain. This results in the binding of Ca2+ in the E1 state or its release in E2 state.
Based on the structures, it has been possible to explain how events occurring at diﬀerent sites
(phosphorylation/dephosphorylation in the cytoplasmic domain and binding of calcium in the
TM domain) separated by y50 Å may be coupled mechanically.


3.1.2 Light-driven pumps
Membrane proteins of the bacteriorhodopsin family have a variety of functions, all triggered by
light absorption and isomerisation of the chromophore retinal. Bacteriorhodopsin, the founding
member of this family, was discovered by Stoeckenius & Rowen (1967) in the purple membrane
from Halobacteria, and subsequently shown to function as a light-driven proton pump (Oesterhelt
& Stoeckenius, 1973). It was shown to be a seven-helix bundle (Henderson & Unwin, 1975) and
since then many related structures have been solved at atomic resolution by both X-ray and
electron crystallography (Belrhali et al. 1999; Luecke et al. 1999)
   Members of the family are widely distributed in organisms from bacteria and archaebacteria up
to simple eukaryotes such as Neurospora (Bieszke et al. 1999) and Chlamydomonas (Nagel et al.
2002). Their functions include proton pumping, chloride ion pumping (Schobert & Lanyi, 1982)
and phototactic signalling (Gordeliy et al. 2002). All members of the family have a similar photo-
cycle initiated by the isomerisation of all-trans retinal to 13-cis retinal. A sequence of spectro-
scopically distinct intermediates coupled to the particular function follows. In bacteriorhodopsin,
the key intermediate is M412 from which a proton has been released on the extracellular side, but
the Schiﬀ base is not deprotonated in the halorhodopsin photocycle nor in the sensory rho-
dopsins. Bacteriorhodopsin (bR) and sensory rhodopsin (sRII) both show a substantial structural
change that is important for ion pumping or signalling via interaction with a transducer protein.
In bacteriorhodopsin, the largest structural change consists of 3- to 4-Å movements of the
cytoplasmic end of helix 6 and a smaller movement of helix 7 during the second half of the
photocycle (Fig. 10a), which opens up the cytoplasmic half-channel to allow reprotonation of the
Schiﬀ base from the cytoplasmic surface (Subramaniam & Henderson, 2000). This structural
change is likely to be common to all members of the family, though coupled in slightly diﬀerent
ways to the diﬀerent functions. The most complex structure solved so far is the Natronobacter
sRII :HtrII complex (Gordeliy et al. 2002), which is a dimer with a twofold axis relating the two
HtrII helical hairpins and the two molecules of sRII bound on each side. The light-induced
structural change in sRII helix F is thought to cause a helix rotation in the HtrII dimer, which is
then coupled to the methyl-accepting cytoplasmic domain and subsequently to the photophobic
94     K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




                   (a)                                              (b)
Fig. 10. Light driven pumps : (a) bR (1FBB and 1FBK) and (b) sRII:HtrII dimeric complex (1H2S).
Bacteriorhodopsin is one of the simplest monomeric membrane proteins, composed of a seven-TM helix
bundle with the chromophore retinal (red) bound in the centre of the bundle. Light isomerises the retinal
and a proton is then released towards the extracellular side from its Schiﬀ base with K216 (blue). A large
structural change, (from purple to yellow in panel a) then opens the cytoplasmic half-channel to allow
reprotonation of the Schiﬀ base and completion of the cycle. A similar structural change is thought to be
present in other members of the bacteriorhodopsin family. Here the structure of sRII, a photophobic
sensor (orange) in halobacteria is shown in complex with the helical hairpin dimer (green) of its cognate
transduction partner, HtrII. In this case, the structural change couples to a cytoplasmic chemotactic/
phototactic methylation cascade.


behavioural response of the bacteria (Fig. 10 b). A recent addition to the family comes from
the discovery of channelopsin (Nagel et al. 2002), which is a light-activated ion channel that
is proving to be a useful tool in electrophysiology, but whose structure has not yet been deter-
mined.


3.1.3 ATP synthases
In the inner membranes of prokaryotes, mitochondria and chloroplasts, the energy stored in
electrochemical gradients can be converted ﬁrst into subunit conformational changes by mech-
anical rotation in the F1Fo-ATPases, and these conformational changes then catalyse the syn-
thesis of ATP (Nakamoto et al. 2008). In eukaryotes, vacuolar V1Vo-ATPases generate a proton
motive force (pmf) by hydrolysing ATP to cause acidiﬁcation of the internal space of vacuoles
(Drory & Nelson, 2006 ; Jeﬀeries et al. 2008). The archeal A1Ao-ATPase is more closely related to
eukaryotic V-ATPases but its normal function is to synthesise rather than hydrolyze ATP
(Gruber & Marshansky, 2008). The basic architecture of all these ATPases includes a soluble
catalytic domain (F1, V1 or A1) and a membrane embedded rotor domain (Fo, Vo or Ao) linked by
central and peripheral stalks. The number of subunits associated with the catalytic domain is
constant but the number of subunits associated with Fo, Vo or Ao and the peripheral stalk varies
within each class of ATPase and depends on the organism from which it is isolated. Perhaps this
complexity is one reason why a high-resolution structure of a complete ATPase of any class has
not yet been reported, although a medium resolution X-ray structure of yeast F1c10-ATPase
(Stock et al. 1999), which forms a major part of the whole structure, shows the organisation of
                                                           Structures of membrane proteins      95

the c-ring with respect to the soluble F1 domain. In addition, structures determined by single
particle cryo-EM of intact bovine F1Fo-ATPase (Rubinstein et al. 2003) and tobacco hornworm
V1Vo-ATPase (Muench et al. 2009) have provided molecular envelopes into which high-
resolution subunit structures have been docked (Dickson et al. 2006). Several reviews describing
the molecular architecture and mechanism of F-type and V-type ATPases are available (Drory &
Nelson, 2006 ; Gruber & Marshansky, 2008 ; Nakamoto et al. 2008). Our focus here will be on the
membrane embedded rotor domain.
   The membrane embedded rotor domain in F1Fo-ATPases consists of a minimal core of the
three TM proteins a, b and c such as found in E. coli but additional subunits are sometimes found
in ATPases from diﬀerent organisms. Subunit a, predicted to span the membrane ﬁve times
harbours a crucial arginine essential for ion transport. Subunit b, which contains a single TM
helix in the bacterial enzyme (but two in mitochondria), forms the peripheral stalk that interacts
with subunit d of the F1 subunit (or OSCP, d and F6 in mitochondria). Subunit c, also called
proteolipid protein or c-ring, forms a circular oligomer that interacts with subunit a of the rotor
domain and the F1 domain through the central stalk. Of the membrane embedded proteins,
only the structure of subunit c has been solved by X-ray crystallography. There is a sodium
dependent F1Fo-ATPase from Ilyobacter tartaricus (Meier et al. 2005), a proton dependent
F1Fo-ATPase from chloroplast (Pogoryelov et al. 2009 ; Vollmar et al. 2009) and an NMR spec-
troscopic study on monomeric subunits of E. coli c-ring in organic solvent (Girvin et al. 1998).
Subunit c of I. tartaricus is an 11-membered ring while the chloroplast ring has 14 subunits. In
both cases each subunit is made up of a helical hairpin with a conserved glutamate approximately
in the middle of the bilayer (Fig. 11 b).
   The rotor domain of the Vo-ATPase has a minimal core of only two subunits, a and c. The
structure of the c subunit of V-ATPase from Enterobacter hirae (Murata et al. 2005) has 10 subunits
each with four TM helices (which form the K-ring) rather than two helices found in F-ATPases
and shows evidence of gene duplication. The four TM helices form two covalently linked and
homologous hairpins (Fig. 11 a). However, during the process of duplication and fusion, only
one hairpin has retained the conserved glutamate, a feature that results in a lower ion:ATP ratio
than it would have if both hairpins retained the glutamate. The lower ratio also makes it likely
that these enzymes have evolved to become proton pumps that can only hydrolyse ATP. Ion
translocation in both F-type and V-type ATPase has been postulated to occur through two half
channels formed by subunit c and subunit a, via the following hypothetical mechanism. Rotation
of the c ring brings the conserved glutamate in subunit c close to the conserved arginine in
subunit a, which, due to electrostatic interaction, results in the release of an ion (H+ or Na+) to
the cytoplasm in F-ATPase or periplasm in V-ATPase. Subsequent rotation of the ring disrupts
the interaction between the arginine and glutamate residues and permits binding of a new ion
from the other side of the membrane via the second half-channel. In the case of F-type ATP
synthase, the rotary motion is energetically driven by the electrochemical proton gradient,
whereas in the case of V-type ATPases, the rotary motion is driven in the opposite direction by
the conformational changes in the V1 domain induced by ATP hydrolysis.
   An interesting aspect of the c-ring in F1Fo-ATPases is that the subunit composition diﬀers
between diﬀerent organisms. So far, the number of subunits in c-rings has been found to vary
between 10 and 15 (von Ballmoos et al. 2008). During each cycle (rotation of 360x), ATP
synthase generates three ATP molecules and the number of ions, as well as the strength of the
ion motive force required, thus depends on the number of c-subunits. An organism with more
subunits will require less ion motive force. There also exist hybrid rotors with a mixture of both
96     K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




                           (a)                                                     (b)
Fig. 11. Side and top view of the rotor subunits from prokaryotic V-type or F-type ATPases : (a) K-ring
(2BL2) and (b) c-ring (1YCE). The rotors of the F1Fo and V1Vo-ATPases comprise multimers of identical
subunits that give rise to c-rings and K-rings, respectively. The c-ring of Ilyobacter tartaricus is an 11-mem-
bered ring in which each monomer is a helical hairpin (two subunits are highlighted in cyan) with a
conserved glutamate or aspartate residue (red sticks) in the middle of membrane. The K-ring of Enterobacter
hirae is a 10-membered ring, with each monomer having two homologous hairpins (cyan and yellow)
covalently linked resulting in four TM helices per protein monomer. Only one of these hairpins has the
conserved glutamate (red sticks in subunit coloured yellow) resulting in a lower ion to ATP ratio than would
be obtained if both hairpins retained a glutamate. However, the structure is equivalent to a 20-membered
                                                                Structures of membrane proteins        97

F and V-type c subunits in a single ring. In Acetobacterium woodii, the rotor has nine c subunits of
F-type each with two TM helices together with one gene-duplicated V-type subunit with four
TM helices giving rise to an 11-membered ring (Fritz et al. 2008). However, due to the presence
of a single charged residue in the V-type subunit only ten ion-binding sites are found. It is not
clear how such variations in subunit numbers serve the bacterium and what physiological ad-
vantage they provide.


3.1.4 ABC transporters
The superfamily of ABC (ATP-binding cassette) transporters comprise membrane proteins in-
volved in the active uptake of nutrients and others involved in the extrusion of toxic compounds.
For example, P-glycoprotein (PGP) is an ABC transporter that plays an important role in the
eﬄux of drugs from cells. The basic architecture of ABC transporters includes two TM and two
cytoplasmic domains, which can either be fused into a single polypeptide or be encoded by
separate genes. Thus, ABC transporters are either true dimers or have a structurally recognisable
twofold axis. The cytoplasmic ATP hydrolysing domains provide the necessary energy for uni-
directional transport and the associated TM domains form the substrate translocation pathway.
One way of classifying the ABC transporters is based on the direction of transport, i.e. as im-
porters or exporters. Importers are exclusively found in prokaryotes and they rely on additional
high-aﬃnity soluble periplasmic proteins to bind the substrate and deliver it to the TM domain.
In importers, the TM domain and the ATP binding domain are expressed as separate proteins
and then assembled to form a full transporter. ABC exporters are widely distributed from bacteria
to mammals and they play a major role in diverse processes such as the extrusion of drugs, transport
of lipids or the transport of antigenic/viral peptides for recognition as part of the major histo-
compatibility complex. Substrates are either taken from the inner leaﬂet of the membrane bilayer
or directly from the cytoplasm (Davidson & Maloney, 2007; Locher, 2008 ; Oldham et al. 2008).
   The cytoplasmic nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs) contain key motifs that are largely con-
served such as the Walker A and B motifs and loops that mediate interaction between the two
NBDs or with the TM domains. Perhaps the most important observation from the crystal struc-
tures is the head-to-tail cyclic arrangement of the two NBDs, which places the conserved motifs
at the interface between the subunits. This results in two ATP molecules being sandwiched at the
dimer interface. Such an arrangement allows for positive co-operativity between subunits. Due to
the large variety of substrates being transported, the TM domains are widely divergent in both
their amino acid sequence and the number and orientation of TM helices. While the exporters
known so far all have 12 TM helices, importers contain between 10 and 20 TM helices.
   The structures of ABC exporters include the multidrug eﬄux pumps, Sav1866, P-glyco-
protein, and the lipid ﬂippase MsbA (Dawson & Locher, 2006 ; Ward et al. 2007 ; Aller et al. 2009).
In the presence of ADP but in absence of a substrate, Sav1866 adopts an outward-facing ATP-
bound conformation (Fig. 12b) while P-glycoprotein reveals a substrate bound in an inward
facing conformation (Fig. 12a). Both these proteins show an intricate architecture where TM



c-ring. Both proteins are sodium-dependent ATPases and the crystal structure shows bound sodium ions
(purple) in all subunits. Residues from the same subunit mediate sodium coordination in K-ring, whereas in
the c-ring residues from neighbouring subunit contribute to sodium coordination. The top view of both
proteins shows a central hole ﬁlled by lipids (green sticks).
98    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

helices adopt a domain-swapped architecture. The interface between TM helices 4 and 5, and TM
10–11 in P-glycoprotein is thought to act as a portal for lateral entry of hydrophobic substrates
from the inner leaﬂet of the membrane. The large cavity observed in P-glycoprotein might
explain its ability to transport a broad range of substrates up to a mass of 4000 Daltons and
to distinguish stereoisomers (Aller et al. 2009). Structures of P-glycoprotein with stereoisomers
of cyclic peptides reveal that they bind in diﬀerent locations and with diﬀerent stoichiometry
(Fig. 12 a). The cavity holding the cyclic peptides is largely hydrophobic. Upon ATP hydrolysis
and a conformational change to an outward facing conformation, the aﬃnity for substrate is
thought to decrease to allow substrate release. In fact, the structure of Sav1866 in its outward
facing conformation reveals a hydrophilic cavity close to the inner leaﬂet with no signiﬁcant
hydrophobic patch (Dawson & Locher, 2006 ; Fig. 12 b) suggesting how its aﬃnity for a hydro-
phobic substrate would be reduced.
   Six diﬀerent importer structures have been solved to date. The simplest of them is a methionine
importer (MetNI) with 10 TM helices (Kadaba et al. 2008) whereas the molybdate/tungstate
transporters from archeae have 12 TM helices (Hollenstein et al. 2007 ; Gerber et al. 2008) and the
maltose transporter (MalFGK) from E. coli has 14 TM helices (Oldham et al. 2007). Although the
number of TM helices varies, the orientation of the core helices as deﬁned in the MetNI im-
porter (Fig. 13a) are conserved in the other transporters, indicating a common evolutionary
pathway. In contrast, BtuCD (Fig. 13d ) and HI1470/71 (Fig. 13e) that import chelated metal
have a total of 20 TM helices (Locher et al. 2002 ; Hvorup et al. 2007 ; Pinkett et al. 2007) and the
relationship in 3D is less obvious. The diﬀerence in the number of helices has been attributed to
the size of the substrates being transported.
   The transport cycle of an ABC transporter can be followed based on its nucleotide bound
state according to the following hypothetical mechanism. With no nucleotide bound, the NBDs
do not interact with one another and the TM domains adopt an inward facing conformation.
Binding of ATP results in a closing-up of the NBD domains and the TM domains to create an
outward facing conformation, in which an exporter would release the substrate and an importer
would accept its substrate from the binding protein. Release of ADP and inorganic phosphate
from the NBDs most likely then ﬂips the TM domains to an inward facing conformation where
importers release substrate and exporters are ready to accept new substrate.
   Although structures for diﬀerent conformations of the same protein are not yet available, the
structures of diﬀerent transporters provide glimpses of various states of the transport cycle.
In the absence of bound nucleotide, ABC transporters adopt an inward facing conformation as
seen in multiple structures (Hollenstein et al. 2007 ; Pinkett et al. 2007; Gerber et al. 2008 ; Kadaba
et al. 2008 ; Aller et al. 2009). Even when the binding protein with its substrate is attached to the
transporter, the absence of ATP in the NBDs results in an inward facing conformation
(Hollenstein et al. 2007 ; Fig. 13 b). Upon ATP binding, the TM domain changes its conformation
to expose the transport pathway so that it is accessible to the binding protein only from outside.
The binding protein then releases the substrate, which diﬀuses into the transporter. The structure
of the MalFGK complex in the presence of maltose and nucleotide probably reﬂects this inter-
mediate state (Oldham et al. 2007 ; Fig. 13c). The BtuCD-F complex has neither the substrate nor
the nucleotide bound but is postulated to be an occluded state of the transporter (Hvorup et al.
2007). It is worth mentioning that in the absence of ATP, BtuBC and HI1470/71 adopt outward
and inward conformations, respectively, which raises the question of whether the detergent
environment might aﬀect the conformational state of the transporter (Locher et al. 2002; Pinkett
et al. 2007 ; Fig. 13d and e).
                                                                  Structures of membrane proteins          99




                            (a)                                            (b)
Fig. 12. ABC (ATP-binding cassette) exporters (a) P-glycoprotein (3G61) and (b) Sav1866 (2HYD). Based
on directionality, ABC transporters can be classiﬁed as importers or exporters, which use the energy of ATP
to import or export substrates. In ABC exporters, the TM (blue and yellow) and nucleotide-binding
domains (light blue and light yellow) are expressed either as a single polypeptide, which then associates to
form a dimer as in Sav1866 (b) or as one single large polypeptide as in P-glycoprotein (a). The two structures
of ABC exporters show an inward facing (a) and outward facing conformation (b). P-glycoprotein crystal-
lised in the presence of substrates, but in the absence of nucleotide, adopts an inward facing conformation
with the nucleotide-binding domains spread apart. Substrate (green) binds at an interface between the two
halves of the TM domain. In contrast, Sav1866 crystallised in the presence of ADP (orange), reveals an
outward facing conformation with the nucleotide-binding domains in close contact. The substrate for
prokaryotic Sav1866 is unknown.


    ABC transporters move substrate against a concentration gradient by directly using the energy
from ATP hydrolysis, giving them a more direct link to the primary energy source in comparison
with secondary transporters that rely on ion gradients to transport substrate. One interesting
question is how cells avoid futile cycles of ATP hydrolysis with no substrate being transported.
Some importers have an additional regulatory domain that binds substrate in the cytoplasm
thereby keeping the NBD domains far apart and locking the transporter in an inward facing
conformation (Gerber et al. 2008 ; Kadaba et al. 2008). It has also been observed that, in im-
porters, the binding proteins stimulate the rate of ATP hydrolysis in the presence of substrate
(Davidson et al. 1992). The structure of ModABC from A. fulgidus, which shows the binding
protein and substrate still in its inward facing conformation (Hollenstein et al. 2007 ; Fig. 13 c),
probably indicates the requirement of both binding protein and ATP for conformational tran-
sition, which might prevent any futile cycle. How the futile cycle is prevented in exporters
remains to be addressed.
    In eukaryotes, proteins such as the cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) and TAP
transporters that load antigenic peptide on to MHC class I receptors are examples of ABC trans-
porters that have profound physiological and clinical relevance. Structures of prokaryotic
100    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




           (a)                                  (b)                                (c)




                                  (d)                                (e)
Fig. 13. ABC importers (a) MetNI (3DHW), (b) ModABC (2ONK), (c) MalFGK (2R6G), (d) BtuCD
(1L7V) and (e) HIF (2NQ2). Found only in prokaryotes, the domains of importers are encoded and
assembled separately (TM domains are in blue and yellow, and the nucleotide-binding domains are in red).
Additional regulatory domains can be also found within the NBD such as the C2 domain (cyan) in the
MetNI transporter. A high-aﬃnity periplasmic binding protein (green) delivers the substrate to the trans-
porter (ModABC and MalFGK). Based on the TM architecture ABC importers can be subdivided into type
I and II importers. Type I importers have a variable number of TM helices (10–14) but the core helices as
deﬁned by the minimal MetNI methionine transporter is conserved (a). More commonly observed are
12 TM helices (ModABC and b) while maltose transporter MalFGK has additional peripheral helices (c with
additional helices shown in grey). The structure of MetNI (a) without a substrate or nucleotide, and the
                                                                 Structures of membrane proteins        101

transporters have provided a platform to understand the mechanism of ABC transporters.
However, the conformational plasticity observed among these transporters and some unique
aspects of eukaryotic transporters (for example, CFTR also functions as a chloride channel) calls
for many more individual structures in diﬀerent conformational states to be determined. One
interesting study describes how deletion of the cytoplasmic ATP hydrolysing domain in the
multidrug transporter, LmrA, results in a functional but proton-dependent transporter (Venter
et al. 2003). Conversely, it is possible that some secondary transporters (discussed below) ac-
quired an ATP hydrolysing domain to become ABC transporters.


3.2 Secondary transporters
From the numerous sequenced genomes, the secondary transporters are one of the largest
classes of membrane proteins (Paulsen et al. 1998). Secondary transporters carry out a wide
variety of functions including transport of many metabolites and ion homeostasis. They are
classiﬁed into diﬀerent families based on sequence homology and function. Clustering of
transporters according to hydropathy proﬁle analysis distinguishes speciﬁc folds and predicts
relationships between the transporter families (Lolkema & Slotboom, 2003), suggesting that they
may have a distant evolutionary relationship. Transport of a given substrate can be coupled to
H+ ions in one organism or to Na+ ions in another and there is no relation between substrate
and ion speciﬁcity (Lolkema et al. 1994). Whether a speciﬁc system is coupled to H+ or Na+ ions
is probably related to speciﬁc environmental conditions rather than to the optimisation of the
catalytic eﬃciency of secondary transporters.
   Like the primary transporters discussed in section 3.1, secondary transporters also
undergo large structural changes, but unlike the P-type ATPases or ABC transporters that
can be trapped in a particular conformation using ATP analogues, stabilising the secondary
transporters in one of the many conformations has proven harder. Hence, well-diﬀracting
crystals of secondary transporters have been relatively diﬃcult to obtain and usually require a
careful design of protein construct, the identiﬁcation of mutants that stabilise one of the
many conformations or, more commonly the screening of many diﬀerent homologues to ﬁnd
one that has a fortuitous predominance of one structure. To date, sixteen structures of individual
proteins from thirteen diﬀerent families of secondary transporter have been determined.
Evidence of gene duplication in the evolution of these transporters is clear from these structures
(Fig. 14), though there is an enormous variety of gene duplication both in the numbers of TM




structure of the molybdate/tungstate transporter (b) from A. fulgidus, with binding protein and substrate
(tungstate in magenta) but in the absence of ATP, both reveal inward facing conformations. In MalFGK (c),
the presence of ATP (orange) and the binding protein induces an outward facing conformation of the TM
domain while the substrate (maltose in magenta) having been released from the binding protein is occluded
(Oldham et al. 2007). Type II importers transport larger substrates such as vitamin B12 and chelated metal.
Examples include BtuCD, the vitamin B12 transporter and the homologous HI1470/71, which transports
chelated metal. Each monomer has 10 TM helices. BtuCD and HI1470/71 were crystallised in the absence
of substrate or nucleotide but reveal outward and inward facing conformations, respectively, probably
induced by the detergent environment (Locher et al. 2002 ; Pinkett et al. 2007 ; d and e). With all these
structures, one can envision a productive cycle, which is described in the main text. However, in the absence
of structures from the same protein and considering the probable eﬀects of detergent (BtuCD and HI1470/
71), more biochemical and structural data is required to obtain a complete picture of the transport cycle.
                                                                                                                                                                                102
                                                                                                                                                                                K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson
                  (a)                                   (b)                                         (c)                                         (d)

Fig. 14. Structural gallery of some secondary transporters (a) ATP/ADP carrier (1OKC), (b) LacY (1PV7), (c) EmrE (3B5D) and (d) ClC (1KPL). Secondary transporters
make up one of the largest membrane protein families, which is dynamic and diverse. Like many membrane proteins, secondary transporters evolved by gene duplication
and fusion. Such repeats are clearly revealed in the recent structures of secondary transporters. The interface between the repeats forms the substrate binding site and
translocation pathway. In the ADP/ATP translocase (a), a mitochondrial carrier, the simple repeat is made up of y100 amino acid helical hairpins that have been triplicated
(blue, green and yellow) to give a six-TM helical protein with a pseudo threefold axis relating the hairpins. This structure of ADP/ATP translocase with bound inhibitor
carboxyatractyloside (red) shows an outward facing conformation. Duplications of helical bundles are more generally observed resulting in either parallel or antiparallel
                                                                                                                                                [Figure 14 caption continued]
                                                                 Structures of membrane proteins       103

helices that are duplicated and in their relative orientation, parallel or antiparallel in the mem-
brane.
   The most primitive transporters possibly consisted of multimers of identical domains, pre-
sumably pairs of helices as seen in subunit c of the F-type ATPases (Fig. 11). It is logical to
imagine that from a simpler structure of multiple identical subunits, evolution favoured a re-
duction in subunit number by gene fusion together with an increase in the complexity of the
sequence, therefore allowing greater speciﬁcity or eﬃciency of a given protein transporter but
also functional diversity. The repeats or the duplicated segments can be arranged with parallel or
antiparallel topology or be assembled post-translationally with the same or opposite orientation
often forming dimers. Thus, one observes a range of manifestations from the simple architecture
of a completely membrane embedded transporter such as EmrE (Ubarretxena-Belandia et al.
2003 ; Chen et al. 2007) to a multimeric protein with a large extracellular domain, as in AcrB
(Murakami et al. 2002) or the intricate architecture of the ClC transporter (Dutzler et al. 2002).
Here, we classify the known structures of secondary transporters based on the arrangement of
TM helices.


3.2.1 ADP/ATP translocase and tripartite architecture of mitochondrial carriers
Membrane transport proteins found in the inner mitochondrial membrane are collectively called
mitochondrial carriers. All of them are members of the same family with three homologous
repeats of about 100 amino acids each resulting in a membrane protein with six TM helices. The
presence of triplicated helical hairpins in mitochondrial carriers was ﬁrst identiﬁed from the
amino acid sequence of the ADP/ATP translocase (Klingenberg, 1981 ; Saraste & Walker, 1982).
The ADP/ATP translocase is the most abundant and probably the most important carrier in the
mitochondrion. It is an electrogenic transporter that exchanges ADP from the cytoplasm with
ATP synthesised by F1Fo-ATPase. Despite its natural abundance as the major mitochondrial
membrane protein, instability in detergent and susceptibility to proteases resulted in a lack of
structural information for more than a quarter of a century (Klingenberg, 2008). Fortunately,
ADP/ATP translocase in complex with an inhibitor carboxyatractyloside has a higher stability in
detergent micelles presumably by trapping the transporter in a single, relatively stable confor-
mation. The structure of the ADP/ATP translocase from bovine mitochondria crystallised in the
presence of carboxyatractyloside showed the six TM helical bundle (Fig. 14 a) with the helical
hairpins related by a pseudo threefold axis and revealed the transporter trapped in an outward
facing conformation (Pebay-Peyroula et al. 2003).


[Figure 14 caption continued]
orientations in the membrane. Lactose permease, LacY (b), a major facilitator superfamily (MFS) transporter
has evolved by gene duplication of 2 six helical bundles (blue and yellow) with the same orientation in the
membrane. This architecture gives rise to a cavity where substrate (red) binds. Many transporters have their
duplicated domains assembled in an antiparallel orientation resulting in two halves wrapped around a
common centre bringing amino acids from distinct a-helices together. Occasionally, such duplicated do-
mains are expressed as individual polypeptides and assembled to form an oligomer. EmrE, a small multi-
drug transporter (c), is synthesised as two polypeptides (blue and yellow) which are inserted into the
membrane in antiparallel orientation, to make an asymmetric homodimer, with inhibitor/substrate tetra-
phenylphosphonium (red) binding at the monomer-monomer interface. The chloride/proton antiporter,
ClC (d ), is one such transporter in which the duplicated domains (blue and yellow) are antiparallel in
orientation with chloride ions (green spheres) binding at the interface.
104    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

3.2.2 Parallel topology
Two duplicated segments typically each containing six TM helices are inserted into the membrane
in the same orientation to give a parallel topology, such as in LacY, the lactose transporter
(Fig. 14 b). The majority of the MFS (major facilitator superfamily – deﬁned because it is the
largest superfamily) proteins have this arrangement with a total of 12 TM helices that are divided
into two halves related to each other by approximate twofold symmetry. The interface creates a
central hydrophilic or hydrophobic cavity that forms the substrate-binding cleft (Hirai et al. 2002 ;
Abramson et al. 2003 ; Huang et al. 2003 ; Yin et al. 2006). AcrB, a proton dependent multidrug
transporter belonging to the root nodulation and division family (RND) also has a parallel
topology but lacks a cavity at the interface of TM helices. In a similar way to that in the MFS
protein family, each monomer of AcrB comprises 12 TM helices and the two halves are related
by a twofold axis. Large homologous extracellular domains are inserted within the TM domains
between H1 and H2 and between H6 and H7, each of which can be subdivided into portal and
TolC docking domains. Hydrophobic substrates that partition into lipids are thought to enter the
transporter through the portal domain and be secreted through the outer membrane protein
TolC (Murakami et al. 2002 ; Seeger et al. 2006). Alternatively, identical polypeptide chains syn-
thesised separately can also form parallel dimers as observed in the zinc transporter, YiiP, in
which each monomer has six TM helices and a cytoplasmic domain (Lu & Fu, 2007). This
architecture resembles that of ABC transporters but without the nucleotide-binding domain.


3.2.3 Antiparallel topology
Duplicated segments in secondary transporters are more commonly observed with an antiparallel
orientation or opposite topology. This is not exclusive to secondary transporters but is also
observed in aquaporins, ammonia channels and the protein translocators, described in sections
2.7, 2.8 and 4.0, respectively. In most transporters such duplication and homology is evident only
at the structural level though the MFS duplication was proposed solely from sequence homology
in the early 1990s (Marger & Saier, 1993). The structure of the chloride/proton antiporter, ClC,
reveals (Fig. 14 d) a protein that crosses the membrane 18 times with highly tilted helices that are
variable in length (Dutzler et al. 2002). The N- and C-terminal halves of the protein are in
opposite orientations and the two halves wrap around a common centre such that the amino
acids from segments of diﬀerent a-helices are brought together. Similarly, sodium ion-dependent
transporters also have an antiparallel topology of duplicated segments. But, in transporters such
as the sodium ion/proton antiporter (NhaA ; Fig. 15 b) or the glutamate transporter (GltPh;
Fig. 15a), such duplication is observed only in the helices involved in transport (Fig. 15) but not
in the rest of protein (Yernool et al. 2004 ; Hunte et al. 2005). However, a new structure for GltPh
(Reyes et al. 2009) trapped in an inward-facing conformation by the introduction of a disulphide
bridge, shows that, in this state, there is an additional antiparallel topology in the N-terminal
region that is not obvious in the outward-facing structure (Yernool et al. 2004).
   Core helices of four distinct sodium-dependent transporters transporting leucine (LeuT ;
Fig. 16 b), galactose (vGLT1 ; Fig. 16d ), hydantoin (Mhp1; Fig. 16 a) and betaine (BetP ; Fig. 16 c)
share a similar fold (Yamashita et al. 2005 ; Faham et al. 2008 ; Weyand et al. 2008 ; Ressl et al. 2009)
but they show very little if any sequence similarity (Fig. 16). This was noted ﬁrst by Lolkema &
Slotboom (2003) using hydropathy proﬁling prior to any structure determination. The structures
of the sodium-dependent transporters show two V-shaped halves (blue and yellow in Fig. 16)
                                                                 Structures of membrane proteins        105




                                    (a)                                   (b)

Fig. 15. Two sodium-dependent transporters (only monomers are shown) (a) GltPh (2NWX) and (b) NhaA
(1ZCD). Sodium-dependent transporters have characteristic breaks in their TM helices and these breaks are
crucial for ion binding. The architecture of sodium-dependent transporters diﬀers signiﬁcantly (see text and
compare with Fig. 14). The glutamate transporter (GltPh) from Pyrococcus horikoshii and the sodium/proton
antiporter (NhaA) from E. coli are two examples of sodium-dependent transporters. GltPh is a homologue
of the mammalian excitatory amino acid transporter family. It forms a trimer but each monomer has a
separate transport pathway. The monomer of GltPh comprises eight TM helices and two, opposite facing,
helical re-entrant hairpins (blue and yellow). Of the eight TM helices, only two (green) associate with the
hairpins to form the transport pathway while remaining six helices (grey) form contacts with other mono-
mers. Two sodium ions (violet) and substrate aspartate (red) are found in the transport pathway with
residues contributed from the two hairpins and TM helices 7 and 8. Conformational changes in the helical
hairpins, TM7 and TM8 are thought to accompany substrate transport. In contrast, NhaA comprises 12 TM
helices with two distinctive domains. Six TM helices are involved in transport (blue and yellow) with two
discontinuous helices exposing their main chain carbonyls oxygens being responsible for ion co-ordination.
The remaining helices (grey) provide a supporting structural role. Unlike in some other transporters (such as
those shown in Fig. 14), gene duplications in both GltPh and NhaA are conﬁned only to helices involved in
transport and not the entire protein.



that are intertwined with an antiparallel arrangement (Abramson & Wright, 2009). A common
feature observed in six diﬀerent structures of sodium ion-dependent secondary transporters
from diﬀerent families is the discontinuity in TM helices located in the middle of membrane
(Yernool et al. 2004 ; Hunte et al. 2005 ; Yamashita et al. 2005 ; Faham et al. 2008 ; Weyand et al.
2008 ; Ressl et al. 2009). Non-helical regions within one or two of these helices expose the main-
chain carbonyl oxygens that are involved in sodium ion and substrate binding, also found in the
Na+-translocating K-ring of E. hirae discussed in section 3.1.3. A consensus sodium ion-binding
motif has been put forward based on these structures and may hold true for all sodium
                                                                                                                                                                           106
                                                                                                                                                                           K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson
                       (a)                               (b)                       (c)                                                   (d)
Fig. 16. Diﬀerent conformational states of sodium dependent secondary transporters : (a) Mhp1, hydantoin transporter (2JLN), (b) LeuT, leucine transporter (2A65), (c)
BetP, betaine transporter (2W8a) and (d) vGlt1, galactose transporter (3DH4). Diﬀerent conformations have been observed in structures of the sodium-dependent
transporters Mhp1, LeuT, BetP and vGlt1. Although, these transporters show little sequence homology a core structure of 10 TM helices (blue and yellow) involved in
                                                                                                                                           [Figure 16 caption continued]
                                                                  Structures of membrane proteins        107

ion-dependent transporters (Boudker et al. 2007). A recent addition to the list of membrane pro-
teins with antiparallel topology is the amino acid transporter family of proteins that are sodium
independent but have similar architecture to sodium-dependent transporters as well as breaks in
the helices in the middle of membrane (Fang et al. 2009 ; Gao et al. 2009 ; Shaﬀer et al. 2009).
   In other families of secondary transporters, single polypeptide chains typically of about 100
amino acids are inserted into the membrane to form dimers in which the two identical poly-
peptide chains have opposite orientations. EmrE, a member of the small multidrug resistance
family, is a membrane protein of this type (Fig. 14 d). It comprises four TM helices from each
monomer, which associate to form an eight-helix antiparallel dimer resulting in a central cavity
that forms the translocation pathway (Ubarretxena-Belandia et al. 2003 ; Chen et al. 2007).
Interestingly, the two chemically identical polypeptide chains have diﬀerent conformations, so
that the whole structure is an asymmetric homodimer.


3.3 Mechanism of secondary transporters
Although monomers are often suﬃcient for transport, dimers or trimers are frequently observed.
Formation of such oligomers could aid in interactions with other proteins or could allow co-
operativity between subunits (Murakami et al. 2006 ; Seeger et al. 2006), or perhaps could simply
increase stability. In a given family the quaternary structure and architecture of membrane
spanning domains are often mutually conserved (Hirai et al. 2002 ; Abramson et al. 2003 ; Huang
et al. 2003 ; Yin et al. 2006). In some transporters, the oligomeric state has been reported to diﬀer
dependent on whether the protein is in a lipid bilayer or in a detergent micelle. The ADP/ATP
translocase and the NhaA antiporter are two such examples where dimers are observed in native
membranes or in 2D crystals (Williams, 2000 ; Klingenberg, 2008) but structures determined in
detergents reveal them as monomers (Pebay-Peyroula et al. 2003 ; Hunte et al. 2005). This is
probably due to delipidation during puriﬁcation. Weak interactions between monomers involv-
ing protein :lipid :protein interactions are disrupted by detergent (Nury et al. 2005 ; Appel et al.
2009).
    A desirable goal, not yet attained, is to determine multiple structures representing the com-
plete transport cycle of a single transporter. While the alternating access model ( Jardetzky, 1966)
predicts the existence of at least two conformations of a transporter in vivo, a crystal structure
usually reveals the static state of only one of these conformations. In fact a number of diﬀerent
conformational states have been observed in the published structures from diﬀerent proteins
belonging to the same family. Structures of lac permease and the glycerol phosphate transporter



[Figure 16 caption continued]
substrate translocation share a recognisably similar fold. Additional helices (grey) might have evolved for
speciﬁc needs or modulation. The structure of Mhp1 with no substrate reveals an outward facing confor-
mation, while LeuT with leucine (red) and two sodium ions (purple) reveals a substrate-occluded but
outward facing state. BetP with substrate bound (red) probably represents an intermediate occluded state
with both gates closed. In contrast, vGlt1in the presence of galactose (red) and a sodium ion (purple) reveals
an inward facing conformation. These structures indicate the existence of multiple states, but it is not clear
whether a particular transporter has its own preferred state to crystallise or the presence of detergent,
substrate or crystallisation conditions modulates the series of states in the transport cycle. Discontinuous
helices in all four transporters are involved in substrate or sodium ion binding. Conformational changes are
thought to occur in the discontinuous helices accompanied by changes in extracellular and intracellular gates
resulting in substrate translocation.
108   K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

from the MFS family reveal an inward facing conformation (Abramson et al. 2003 ; Huang et al.
2003), while EmrD and a low-resolution EM map of OxlT from the same family probably reveal
a substrate-occluded state (Hirai et al. 2002 ; Yin et al. 2006).
    Four structures of sodium-dependent transporters provide another example of conformational
diversity where two of these transporters, Mhp1 and LeuT, reveal an outward facing conformation
in the absence or presence of substrate (Yamashita et al. 2005 ; Weyand et al. 2008 ; Fig. 16 a and b)
while vGLT1 shows substrate bound in an inward facing conformation (Faham et al. 2008 ;
Fig. 16 d ). The structure of BetP with substrate bound has been proposed to be an intermediate
state (Ressl et al. 2009; Fig. 16 c). Comparison of these four structures provides a plausible se-
quence for the mechanism of transport. Conformational change is thought to occur by rotation
of the cytoplasmic part of the discontinuous helices accompanied by changes in extracellular or
intracellular gates that open and close the pathway (Faham et al. 2008). Apart from their role in
substrate binding, such breaks in helices must play an important role in the transport cycle. This
is in contrast to the MFS family of transporters that use a shared binding site at the interface of
two helical halves in which the transport cycle probably involves more global changes in TM
helices, similar to that found in the ABC transporters.
    Is it possible to observe multiple conformations in the same structure ? AcrB, the multi-drug
exporter crystallises as a symmetric as well as an asymmetric trimer. In the asymmetric trimer,
only one monomer has the drug bound and comparison of monomers reveals three distinct
states, proposed to be tight, open and loose, giving rise to the proposal of a possible cyclical
mechanism in which functional states rotate round the trimer (Murakami et al. 2006 ; Seeger et al.
2006).
    Secondary transporters in humans are implicated in many physiological processes and are
important drug targets. Except for the mitochondrial ADP/ATP translocase, other secondary
transporter structures that have been determined so far have come exclusively from prokaryotic
sources, raising the question of whether they are truly relevant to the architecture of mammalian
proteins. LeuT from Aquifex aeolicus, a homologue of neurotransmitter transporters, provides an
excellent example of how structures from prokaryotic homologues can be useful to extend our
understanding of transporters from higher eukaryotes. The hallmarks of the neurotransmitter
transporter family in eukaryotes include a dependence on sodium and chloride ions for transport
as well as inhibition by tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). Structures of LeuT with TCA bound
show that TCAs probably inhibit LeuT by binding to a secondary site near the surface of the
protein that is distinct from the substrate binding site in the centre of membrane (Singh et al.
2007 ; Zhou et al. 2007). Binding of TCA is thought to stabilise the extracellular gate in a closed
conformation thereby preventing the release of substrate. A recent study shows that octyl glu-
coside, the detergent used for crystallising LeuT, occupies the same site as TCA and can also
inhibit LeuT, thus prompting a suggestion that all structures of LeuT determined so far are
blocked in the outward facing conformation (Quick et al. 2009). The substrate of LeuT, leucine,
also binds to this secondary site, which has been proposed to be essential for driving the trans-
porter into a cytoplasmic-facing conformation that subsequently releases substrate. These ob-
servations could explain some of the characteristics of eukaryotic neurotransmitter transporters.
    Secondary transporters have a wide range of transport rates, varying from about 10 molecules
per second to 104 ions per second in some ion transporters. Increasingly, it is becoming clear that
at least some secondary transporters, such as the human serotonin transporter SERT (Li et al.
2002), also exhibit channel-like properties. In fact, the chloride/proton antiporter was initially
classiﬁed as a channel but subsequent electrophysiological analysis revealed it to be an antiporter
                                                            Structures of membrane proteins    109

with a very high transport rate (Accardi & Miller, 2004). Structural explanations, involving small
conformational changes, of how such high transport rates can be achieved are starting to emerge.
It is likely that the diﬀerent topological arrangements of gene-duplicated TM helix domains
(parallel or antiparallel) led to diﬀerent mechanisms of conformational change and associated
diﬀerences in the transport rate. The relatively high number of transporter genes found in
sequenced genomes is likely to represent a relatively small number of unique structures and
translocation mechanisms, but multiple structures from a given family are still needed.


4. Protein translocators
In bacteria, membrane proteins are inserted into the cytoplasmic or periplasmic membranes
either post-translationally or co-translationally and both routes also occur for the secretion of
soluble proteins. Both mechanisms make use of a protein translocation channel, the SecY
complex, consisting in bacteria of a 1:1:1 trimer of SecY, SecE and SecG. During co-translational
protein export, the SecY complex binds directly to the ribosome and the nascent polypeptide
chain exiting from the ribosome drives membrane protein insertion. During post-translational
export, the SecY complex binds to SecA, which drives export using the energy from ATP
hydrolysis to push the polypeptide through the SecY channel (Zimmer et al. 2008). In eukaryotes,
the homologous complex is the Sec61abc complex. Although there has been some controversy
about whether the complex functions as a monomer or higher order oligomer and the crystal
structures show only monomeric complexes (Fig. 17), the best current evidence (Menetret et al.
2007 ; Menetret et al. 2008 ; Zimmer et al. 2008) indicates the monomer is the functional unit.
   SecY, the channel forming subunit has 10 TM helices that are arranged as 2 ﬁve-helix bundles ;
TM1-TM5 in one half of SecY and TM6-TM10 in the other half are related by a pseudo twofold
symmetry axis parallel to the membrane (Fig. 17 a). Although some of the transporters with
antiparallel topology also have 2 ﬁve-helix inverted repeats, the detailed arrangement of helices in
SecY is quite diﬀerent. There is an hourglass-shaped pore between the two SecY domains with
funnels to the cytoplasmic and external sides of the membrane. Subunits SecG and SecE are
located on the periphery of the complex, perhaps to provide structural stability to SecY, which is
believed to undergo fairly large structural changes during protein export. SecG has a single TM
helix in Methanococcus jannaschii (Van den Berg et al. 2004) but there are two TM helices in SecG
from Thermotoga maritima (Tsukazaki et al. 2008 ; Zimmer et al. 2008) with the C-terminal helix
having the same location as the single TM helix in M. jannaschii. SecE is highly tilted and makes
extensive contacts with TM1, TM5, TM6 and TM10 of SecY. In the absence of SecA or a
ribosome, the cytoplasmic funnel is empty and has a diameter of about 25 Å, whereas the
extracellular funnel is occupied by a short plug helix TM2a.
   The ATP driven SecA has ﬁve domains : two N-terminal RecA-like domains that combine to
bind nucleotide, a polypeptide-cross-linking domain (PPXD), a helical wing domain and the
helical scaﬀold domain (HSD). In the protein translocation ﬁeld, there is a lot of interest in
understanding the nature of the structural changes in SecA when a peptide binds, followed by
how SecA binds to SecY and how SecA and SecY work together during transport. A complex of
SecA with SecYEG obtained in presence of ADP and BeCl2 is shown in Fig. 17b viewed parallel
to the membrane. The main contact between SecA and SecYEG is made through the HSD.
Comparison of the structure of SecYEG alone (van den Berg et al. 2004 ; Fig. 17a) with that in
complex with SecA (Zimmer et al. 2008 ; Fig. 17 b) shows that there is an outward movement of
the C-terminal domain of SecY (yellow in Fig. 17a) when SecA binds. Movements of three
110    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




                         (a)                                        (b)

Fig. 17. Protein translocation channels: (a) SecYEb (1RHZ) and (b) SecA–SecYEG (3DIN). Monomeric
SecYEb in M. jannaschii forms the minimal protein translocation unit. The channel forming SecY is made up
of 10 TM helices that can be divided into two equal halves (blue and yellow) related by a pseudo twofold
symmetry axis parallel to the plane of the membrane. Like many other membrane proteins, the two halves
thus have an antiparallel orientation. SecE has a short amphipathic helix and a very long highly tilted TM
helix (green) and forms extensive contact with SecY. The b-subunit (purple) is oriented perpendicular to the
membrane and lies just outside SecY. Together SecE and Secb are thought to provide structural integrity to
SecY during protein translocation. A small helix (red) acts as a plug to seal the channel when no protein is
translocated. A complex between SecA and SecYEG of T. maritima was obtained in the presence of ADP
and BeCl2. SecG of T. maritima (equivalent to the b-subunit of M. jannaschii) has an additional TM helix
(purple). The ﬁve domains of SecA are coloured individually. The two nucleotide-binding domains are
coloured wheat and grey with a molecule of ADP shown in black. The polypeptide-crosslinking and helix
wing domains are shown in aquamarine and orange, respectively. The helical scaﬀolding domain (brown) of
SecA makes contact with the C-terminal domain of SecY. A comparison of the two structures reveals
movement of three TM helices in SecY, which opens up the central channel and is accompanied by
displacement of the plug helix (red). Channel opening allows the polypeptide to be secreted either to the
periplasm or laterally into the membrane.

helices, speciﬁcally TM7, TM8 and TM9, open up the centre of the channel. This allows a two-
helix ﬁnger, corresponding to the two shorter helices of the three helices that make up the helical
scaﬀold domain HSD of SecA, to insert into the cytoplasmic funnel of SecY. At the same time,
TM2a, the plug helix in the external funnel of SecY, moves to a more external position. These
observations have allowed Zimmer et al. (2008) to propose a very plausible conceptual model
for how SecA-mediated transport pushes the polypeptide through the SecY channel : ATP is
hydrolysed and SecA alternately clamps and releases the polypeptide as it is pushed through the
channel.
   Presumably the co-translational mechanism of protein export by direct interaction with the
ribosome involves a similar mechanism (Menetret et al. 2008) with the ribosome replacing SecA
to provide the push. Proteins destined for the membrane, most of which are SecA independent,
                                                           Structures of membrane proteins    111

are thought to be released through a lateral gap that opens up between TM7 and TM2b. In
summary, regular a-helices in SecY undergo relatively large movements of up to 10 Å laterally in
the membrane to provide the ﬂexibility needed for protein export, while ensuring that the
channel is closed and does not leak when not involved in protein transport.


5. Electron transport chains
Energy in cells is obtained either from oxidation of molecules from food or from capture of light
energy through photosynthesis. Each pathway couples a sequence of electron transfer reactions
to synthesis of ATP, from ADP and Pi, via the intermediate energy store of an electrochemical
gradient of hydrogen ions across the membranes of bacteria, chloroplasts or mitochondria.
The electron transfer and associated proton transfer steps occur directionally across the mem-
brane to produce the electrochemical gradient. Peter Mitchell in 1960 ﬁrst proposed the overall
mechanism, the chemiosmotic theory, for which he was awarded the 1978 Nobel Prize in
Chemistry (Mitchell, 1979). The protein:chlorophyll complexes in photosynthesis that are in-
volved in the primary capture of light energy upstream of the electron transport chain are
discussed later.
   In this section, we discuss the structures of the membrane protein complexes that make up the
electron transport chain. This chain carries out the sequence of reactions in which the high
potential energy of electrons from NADH drops down through a sequence of intermediates
(ubiquinone and cytochrome c) ending with the reduction of oxygen to produce water. There are
ﬁve complexes. Complex I is NADH :ubiquinone reductase, which releases the lipophilic re-
duced ubiquinol into the membrane. Complex III then carries out the ubiquinol :cytochrome
c reductase reaction. Finally, in complex IV, cytochrome c reduces molecular oxygen to water
in the cytochrome c oxidase reaction transferring four protons to the site of oxygen reduction,
and pumping four more across the membrane. These three membrane protein complexes
each couple an electron transfer step to the transfer of protons across the membrane to create
the electrochemical membrane potential, which is then used by complex V, the ATP synthase
already discussed in section 3.1.3, to synthesise ATP. Complex II, succinate :ubiquinone re-
ductase, is the ﬁfth member of the membrane bound electron transport chain ; it takes in elec-
trons tangentially from succinate and reduces ubiquinone to ubiquinol, but this transfer, unlike at
other complexes in the chain, is not coupled to proton transfer since the free energy diﬀerence is
too small.
   Much of the current research in this ﬁeld is directed towards understanding the mechanism of
coupling between electron transfer and proton transfer in complexes I, III and IV, but in this
review, we focus only on the general architecture of the proteins and the associated arrangement
of the redox centres through which the electrons pass. In addition to these three integral
membrane protein complexes, mitochondria also have acyl-CoA dehydrogenases and electron-
transfer ﬂavoproteins to transfer electrons from fatty acid b-oxidation to the coenzyme Q pool.
These are membrane bound rather than integral membrane proteins and are mentioned brieﬂy in
section 8.5. In prokaryotes, alternative electron transport pathways exist that allow an organism
to use terminal electron acceptors other than molecular oxygen, which include nitrogen
( Jormakka et al. 2002; Bertero et al. 2003) and sulphur ( Jormakka et al. 2008) but also elements
like selenium, iron and manganese ( Jormakka et al. 2003). Detailed description of alternative
electron transport pathway is beyond the scope of this review, in this section we focus only on
the electron transport chain with molecular oxygen as the terminal electron acceptor.
                                                                                                                                                                                  112
                                                                                                                                                                                  K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson
                      (a)                                        (b)                                     (c)                                               (d )

Fig. 18. Electron transport chain : (a) complex II (1ZOY), (b) complex III (2FYU) and (c and d) complex IV (1V54). (a) Complex II, functional as a monomer as illustrated,
shows four subunits of which two are membrane spanning each with three TM helices (blue and yellow), together with ﬁve cofactors, of which only the haem b (red) and
the quinone binding site (not shown) are located at the level of the membrane. FAD (orange) and three iron–sulphur clusters (brown) are also shown. (b) Complex III,
showing only one half of the dimer that has the TM helix of the ISP-Rieske subunit (cyan) domain swapped with its TM helix (protruding on the left side of the molecule)
interacting more closely with the other monomer. There are eight subunits in the bovine mitochondrial enzyme, of which the cytochrome b subunit is most important
(blue). It contains eight TM helices in two bundles, of ﬁve and three helices. The ﬁve-helix bundle forms the binding site for the two b-type haems (red) that are aligned
vertically above one another with each haem iron being coordinated by two histidine side chains that are 14 residues apart (four turns) on helices B and D. The other three
helices of cytochrome b and the remaining ﬁve single TM helices from other subunits have peripheral roles (grey). Cytochrome c1 (yellow) with its c-type haem (brown) is
located in the intramembrane space. The cytoplasmic/matrix subunits (grey) are also not directly involved in electron transport. (c) Complex IV, showing a side view of only
the two functionally important subunits I and II (blue and yellow), together with the three metal centres : the CuA two-copper site in subunit II (brown spheres), and the
sites for haem a (red) and binuclear haem a3/CuB (red and green) in subunit I. (d) Top view of complete monomer of bovine mitochondrial complex IV, showing all 28 TM
                                                                                                                                                  [Figure 18 caption continued]
                                                                   Structures of membrane proteins         113

   Each electron transport complex is a multi-subunit protein with electron-carrying cofactors
including ﬂavins, iron–sulphur clusters, haems and copper ions. These redox cofactors are
bound either to membrane embedded TM helical domains within each complex or to hydro-
philic domains that protrude on the cytoplasmic or periplasmic sides of the membrane.
Structures of complexes II, III and IV are shown in Fig. 18.

5.1 Complex I – NADH :ubiquinone reductase
At this time, there is no high resolution structure of the membrane-embedded part of complex I,
though there is a good 33-Å resolution structure (Sazanov & Hinchliﬀe, 2006) for the large
cytoplasmic hydrophilic domain of complex I from Thermus thermophilus, showing eight protein
subunits, plus cofactors FMN and a chain of nine iron–sulphur clusters. Indeed all the known
redox centres of complex I are found in this hydrophilic domain. At least seven more protein
subunits in bacteria make up the membrane domain. There are low-resolution structures of the
whole complex from both bacteria and mitochondria determined by electron microscopy
(Grigorieﬀ, 1998 ; Guenebaut et al. 1998). Sequence homology suggests that the large hydro-
phobic subunits of complex I might be homologous to the Na+/H+ antiporter family discussed
in section 3.2.3 (Berrisford et al. 2008) and therefore designed to drive proton transfer via protein
conformational changes. However, there is no real clue yet as to the nature of the presumed
conformational changes that might couple electron transport in the hydrophilic domain to
proton transfer/pumping in the membrane domain.

5.2 Complex II – succinate:ubiquinone reductase
Complex II, with four protein subunits (Fig. 18a), funnels electrons from the succinate oxidation
site at the FAD in the middle of the cytoplasmic hydrophilic domain (equivalent to the matrix
side of the inner membrane in mitochondria) through a 40-Å path made up of 3 distinct iron–
sulphur clusters ending up with reduction of ubiquinone in the membrane (Yankovskaya et al.
2003 ; Sun et al. 2005). The haem b site lies within the TM helical bundle whereas the quinone
binding site is on the lipid facing surface of the TM bundle. The two hydrophobic membrane
spanning subunits (CybL (large) and CybS (small) in pig) each have three TM helices that
surround the single haem b, making a simple ring of six TM helices related by an approximate
twofold axis and with the helices, from amino- to carboxy-terminus, running clockwise viewed
from the cytoplasmic side. Intriguingly, the path of the electron from FAD to quinone does not
appear to pass through the haem, so it is believed that the role of the haem may be to create an
electron sink that minimises production of reactive oxygen species (Tran et al. 2007). The N-
termini of the membrane subunits are inside (i.e. exposed to the cytoplasm or matrix, respect-
ively) and the C-termini outside the bacterial or mitochondrial inner membrane. Thus, the
membrane domain of complex II is a classical six-helix transmembrane bundle with relatively
straight helices. The membrane spanning subunits are both smaller than the two cytoplasmic (or


[Figure 18 caption continued]
helices in cross-section. Only the 12 helices (blue) of subunit I and the two helices of subunit II (yellow) are
directly involved in electron transport and proton pumping. These 12 TM helices in subunit I are related by
an approximate threefold axis, easily visible in the picture with haem a (red) being located in one sector,
haem a3/CuB (red and green) being located in the second sector and proton channel D being located in the
third.
114   K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

matrix) subunits that bind ﬂavin and the iron–sulphur clusters. Other than the hydrophobicity of
the substrate ubiquinone, there is no other reason why complex II needs to be a membrane
protein, so perhaps this is why the membrane domain is so simple. The related membrane
enzyme fumarate reductase shows similar structures but with variations in the arrangement of
TM helices and the number of haem groups (Lancaster et al. 1999).


5.3 Complex III – ubiquinol :cytochrome c reductase
The number of protein subunits in complex III varies from 3 in Paracoccus denitriﬁcans or
Rhodopseudomonas sphaeroides to 9 or 10 in yeast (Hunte et al. 2000) and 11 in bovine mitochondria
(Iwata et al. 1998 ; Esser et al. 2006). Only three subunits, common to all species, have key roles
and each contains a unique cofactor. The large cytochrome b subunit has two b-type haems
embedded within its eight TM helix bundle (Fig. 18 b). The globular cytochrome c1 subunit, with
its c-type haem covalently thioether-linked to cysteine amino acids, is located in the periplasmic
(or intermembrane in mitochondria) space with a single membrane-anchoring TM helix and
ﬁnally, the Rieske iron–sulphur cluster (2Fe-2S ; ISP), located adjacent to cytochrome c1, also has
a single membrane-anchoring TM helix. Overall, complex III is a multi-subunit dimer with a
small degree of domain swapping in that the hydrophilic iron–sulphur domain of one ISP
interacts with one cytochrome b monomer whereas its membrane-anchoring helix interacts with
the other cytochrome b monomer. The ISP redox centre and possibly also cytochrome c1 are fairly
mobile moving by up to 15 Å between diﬀerent crystal structures, reﬂecting their role in electron
transfer by binding to, reducing and releasing successive cytochrome c molecules. The eight non-
conserved subunits are believed to have roles in assembling, stabilising, modulating, regulating or
increasing the eﬃciency of the activity. The three subunits common to all species, not surpris-
ingly, have the greatest structural conservation and are the key to understanding the function.
   The eight TM helices in cytochrome b are arranged as two bundles, a ﬁve-helix N-terminal
bundle located near the dimer twofold axis that binds the two haems, and a more distant three-
helix C-terminal bundle. The four histidine side chains that are the axial ligands to the two b-type
haems are located 14 residues (four turns) apart on helices B and D facing the centre of the
protein. Helices A, B, C and D are arranged clockwise around the haems viewed from the
cytoplasm/matrix side, as in complex II. The two quinone binding sites are accessible from
hydrophobic clefts within the membrane at the interface between the two cytochrome b sub-
units, with the Qo site being close to the low potential haem bL on the intermembrane side and
Qi being close to the high potential haem BH on the matrix side. In the overall Q-cycle reaction,
one of the two electrons from quinol in the Qo site is transferred via ISP and cytochrome c1 to
reduce cytochrome c, whereas the other reduces the Qi quinone. The protons that are an intrinsic
part of the redox reaction are released from quinol in the Qo site and taken up by quinone at the
Qi site on the other side of the membrane, thus converting the electron transfer energy into an
electrochemical proton gradient.
   There are two very large cytoplasmic/matrix subunits, known as the core 1 and core 2 sub-
units in the bovine mitochondrial enzyme. These are conserved in eukaryotes but absent in
bacteria. Their amino acid sequences show clear homology to matrix processing peptidases
(MPP), which are zinc metalloproteases. The bovine bc1 complex has only weak protease activity
and in yeast there is no protease activity at all since the amino acid side chains that are normally
the zinc ligands have mutated so that no zinc is bound. The role of core 1 and core 2 thus
appears to be that of a structurally important relic of some earlier function. There are three other
                                                             Structures of membrane proteins     115

TM helices from three smaller peripheral subunits within each monomer of the bc1 complex,
whose role is less important.
   A related complex, cytochrome b6f which is a plastoquinol :plastocyanin reductase, is found in
chloroplasts. It catalyses the redox step linking photosystems I and II, whose structures are
described in section 6. The four TM helices and the 2 b-type haems in cytochrome b6 are
homologous to the four N-terminal helices and the two haems of cytochrome b (Kurisu et al.
2003 ; Stroebel et al. 2003). The three TM helices of subunit IV of the b6f complex are located in
the same region as the four C-terminal TM helices of cytochrome b. Cytochrome f and c1 are
functionally the same but structurally quite diﬀerent. The redox roles of ubiquinol and cyto-
chrome c in the bc1 complex are played by plastoquinol and plastocyanin in b6f. In cytochrome
b6, there is also an extra haem on the stromal side, equivalent to the matrix side in mitochondria,
as well as a chlorophyll and a carotenoid molecule both thought to play structural, non-redox
roles (Kurisu et al. 2003). Finally there are also four smaller peripheral subunits in the b6f com-
plex, each with a single TM helix, occupying positions unrelated to the extra single-spanning
subunits in the bc1 complex.

5.4 Complex IV – cytochrome c oxidase (aa3)
Cytochrome oxidase consists of three to ﬁve protein subunits in bacteria and up to 13 in bovine
mitochondria. Of these, only subunits I and II (Fig. 18c) are absolutely essential for the oxidation
of cytochrome c and the reduction of oxygen to water. The other subunits presumably help
assembly, regulation or eﬃciency. As the terminal oxidase, cytochrome oxidase is the ﬁnal step in
oxidation of substrate by molecular oxygen. Even minor improvements in the eﬃciency of
energy conversion will have been locked in by evolution. Thus, the overall complexity of the
structure masks the intrinsic simplicity of the reaction. The overall reaction is
4exout (from four cytochrome c molecules)+8H+in +O2 p2H2 O+4H+out :

   The enzyme stores the ﬁrst two electrons in the absence of oxygen on haem a3 iron and CuB.
After this two electron reduction, cytochrome oxidase reacts rapidly with oxygen to split the
O==O bond, assisted by proton and electron transfer from the covalent active-site tyrosine, with
the third and fourth electrons arriving via CuA and haem a. The four electron reduction of
oxygen to produce two water molecules is accompanied by uptake of four chemical protons to
maintain electroneutrality, but as ﬁrst demonstrated by Wikstrom in 1977, each electron transfer
is also accompanied by the pumping of up to one proton across the membrane thus doubling the
electrochemical gradient created by the electron and chemical proton transfer reactions and
making greater use of the redox energy drop between cytochrome c and oxygen. The location of
the proton pumping channel, the nature of the proton pumping group and how any structural
change might cause pK changes and control accessibility is still controversial, though there is a
steady ﬂow of publications from several groups addressing the problem. The most convincing
current view (Brzezinski & Gennis, 2008) is that the energy from purely electrostatic interactions
between the electrons and protons as they accumulate at the binuclear a3/CuB site, before and
after oxygen binding, drives the proton pumping during each cycle of electron transfer from CuA
to haem a to the a3/CuB binuclear centre.
   The 18-Å structure of the 13 subunit bovine cytochrome oxidase (Tsukihara et al. 1996 ;
Yoshikawa et al. 1998 ; Tsukihara et al. 2003 ; Aoyama et al. 2009) in the fully oxidised state, shown
in Fig. 18c and d, shows all the features present in complexes with fewer subunits from other
116    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

species, though key mechanistic insights have also been obtained from structures of bacterial
cytochrome oxidases especially the minimal, two subunit enzymes from P. denitriﬁcans
(Ostermeier et al. 1997) and R. sphaeroides (Qin et al. 2006). Analysis of uncoupled mutants has also
helped to understand the mechanism of proton pumping.
   The key features of the structure are :
1. Although the monomer is the functional unit, the bovine mitochondrial enzyme exists as a
   dimer in vivo and in the crystals.
2. Subunit I shows an internal approximate threefold axis relating three ‘ pores ’ that house haem
   a, the haem a3/CuB bimetal centre and one of the proton channels that have been deﬁned by
   analysing mutants.
3. Subunit II contains the CuA sites (two copper atoms) and two TM helices that act as an
   anchor.
4. Subunit III has seven more helices with a subsidiary role, since the two subunit enzyme has
   full activity.
5. There are further subsidiary subunits with single TM helices, consisting of the single subunit
   SuIV in bacteria or seven additional subunits in bovine mitochondria.
6. There is a unique spontaneous covalent bond formed between H240-Ne and Y244-Ce in the
   bovine enzyme, conserved in all family A and B oxygen reductases, which reduces the pK of
   the tyrosine hydroxyl. H240 is one of the CuB ligands and the tyrosine hydroxyl group points
   directly at the oxygen binding site, so it is believed that it must have a role in stabilising at least
   one of the intermediates in the four electron reaction, possibly even as a free radical.
7. There are two proton channels, named D and K from the mutations that originally identiﬁed
   them, but how they function is still under investigation.
8. The O2 binding site bridges between the haem a3 iron atom and CuB, and is otherwise
   occupied by hydroxyl and water.
9. The sequence of electron transfers from binuclear CuA to haem a to haem a3/CuB is likely to
   occur through a series of H-bonded groups.
   The overall function of cytochrome oxidase is of great interest because of its biological
importance, its chemical complexity, and the tightness of the coupling between electron transfer,
charge separation and proton pumping. Although there are small changes in structure between
the fully oxidised and fully reduced structures (Yoshikawa et al. 1998), which may be part of a
proton pump gating mechanism in bovine mitochondria, the overall structure is remarkably rigid,
acting as a framework for electron and proton transfers that are mainly controlled by electro-
statics. This is in marked contrast to the very much larger structural changes that characterise the
primary and secondary transporters that transport or pump much larger substrates. In fact, the
structures of the transmembrane helix bundles of all three electron transfer complexes discussed
in this section are relatively rigid and immobile.


6. Photosynthesis
In this section, we consider only those aspects of photosynthesis that involve membrane proteins
or membrane protein complexes whose structure is known in enough detail to resolve the
polypeptide chain and cofactor or pigment structure. The key structures are of two kinds : those
that absorb incident light and those that convert the light energy into chemical or electrochemical
energy by charge separation and electron transfer.
                                                              Structures of membrane proteins     117

    Primary light absorption occurs in the light-harvesting (LH) complexes (LHCs), which then
funnel light energy, by Förster energy transfer, directly to the reaction centres jumping over
distances between neighbouring chromophores of 10–25 Å. Primary charge separation occurs
within the reaction centres (RC), leading to creation of a membrane potential, or reduction of a
cofactor such as a quinone, or both. This intermediate energy store is subsequently converted into
ATP through the electron transport chain and oxidative phosphorylation. Many, but not all, of the
light-harvesting complexes are integral membrane proteins in which chlorophylls are coordinated
to amino acid side chains or sometimes to water molecules, main chain carbonyl groups or lipid,
within the TM helical segments of the LH complexes. The carotenoids make more non-polar
interactions sometimes with a single hydrogen bond at each end, whereas iron–sulphur com-
plexes are coordinated by cysteine side chains. In many cyanobacteria and algae, there are ad-
ditional soluble accessory light-harvesting protein complexes, which bind to the membrane and
further enhance the absorption of incident light photons. The direct energy transfer mechanism,
which also depends on spectral overlap and transition dipole orientation, is most eﬃcient over
small distances. The time it takes is less than 1–2 ps when the chromophores are closer than 15 Å
but the excited state lifetimes increase to 30–50 ps as the distances increase to 25 Å. The overall
structures of the complexes have clearly evolved to provide a stable environment that optimises
the energy transfer eﬃciency while decreasing the likelihood of adverse oxidation events.
    In 1985, the purple bacterial Rhodopseudomonas viridis reaction centre structure was the ﬁrst high
resolution membrane protein structure to be determined (Deisenhofer et al. 1985), and at that
time was also the largest asymmetric structure ever determined by X-ray crystallography. It has
11 TM helices altogether (Fig. 19 a). There are ﬁve TM helices in the L and M subunits, which are
curled around each other related by a local pseudo-twofold axis perpendicular to the membrane,
and one in subunit H, which is oﬀset to one side. Subunits L and M surround the chromophores
in the centre of the structure, including four chlorophyll-b molecules, two bacteriopheophytins,
two quinones and an iron centre. The structure was subsequently reﬁned (Deisenhofer et al.
1995) and is shown in Fig. 19 a. It represents the very heart of photosynthesis since the central
‘ special pair ’ of bacteriochlorophyll-b molecules is the site at which the electronic excitation that
follows light absorption is ﬁrst converted into electronic charge separation across the width of
the membrane. Similar reaction centres are found in all photosynthetic organisms, built around
subunits homologous to the L and M subunits of purple bacteria. These range from the purple
and green sulphur bacteria, which have only one reaction centre and do not evolve oxygen, to
more complex organisms such as cyanobacteria and green plants, which have two photosystems,
PSI and PSII, and generate oxygen from water (Ben-Shem et al. 2003 ; Loll et al. 2005 ; Amunts
et al. 2007). In PSII, subunits D1 and D2 are homologous to L and M, whereas in PSI, the ﬁve
C-terminal TM helices in PsaB and PsaA occupy the equivalent positions. In addition, the light-
harvesting subunits CP43 and CP47 in PSII, each with six TM helices, are adjacent to D1 and
D2, and are related by the same pseudo-twofold axis. CP43 and CP47 in turn occupy hom-
ologous positions to the six N-terminal helices of PsaB and PsaA. Beyond these central core
subunits of all the reaction centres, the structures then diverge. Fig. 19 b to d shows how these
diﬀerent but related structures have developed during evolution. At greater physical distances
from the RC, the nature of the light-harvesting subunits in diﬀerent organisms diverges with a
clear diﬀerence then emerging between those in bacterial photosynthetic complexes and those in
algae and vascular plants.
    The major plant LHC, known as LHCII is arguably the most abundant membrane protein on
planet Earth. It has 3 TM helices, 14 chlorophylls and 4 carotenoids, and forms trimers (Fig. 28 a).
                                                                                                                                                                                  118
                                                                                                                                                                                  K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson
        (a)                             (b)                                              (c)                                                     (d)

Fig. 19. Photosynthetic complexes : (a) reaction centre (1PRC), (b) RC-LH1 complex (1PYH), (c) PSI complex (2O01) and (d) PSII complex (3BZ1). The common reaction
centre (RC) core can be seen here in the same orientation in each part of the ﬁgure. In (b), (c) and (d), the RCs are surrounded by a great variety of subunits (see text). The
oxygen-evolving centre (OEC) is shown as pink spheres in PSII. Choloropyhll in all proteins are shown as grey sticks.
                                                              Structures of membrane proteins     119

In contrast, the purple bacteria have quite diﬀerent light-harvesting complexes made up of two
single TM protein subunits (a and b), each of which binds three chlorophylls and two caro-
tenoids. Bacterial LH1 forms a ring of 15 LH subunits around each reaction centre (Roszak et al.
2003), whereas bacterial LH2 forms similar rings of 8 or 9 subunits that are not in direct contact
with the RC. In PSI from cyanobacteria ( Jordan et al. 2001), there is an arc of four LHCI
molecules, homologous to LHCII, each with three TM helices, on the periphery of the core.
Thus, two quite diﬀerent structures are used for light-harvesting in the purple bacteria and in
higher plants, but both funnel the light energy down an energy gradient, ending up in both cases
at the RC, where the energy is used for charge separation and converted into a potential gradient
across the membrane.
   In one of the simplest cases, such as RC-LH1 from Rhodopseudomonas palustris, there are
three RC proteins and two LH subunits, together with 50–60 chromophores. By contrast
in pea or cyanobacteria, there are 17 to 20 protein subunits and 50–170 chlorophylls in addition
to numerous carotenoids, iron–sulphur clusters and quinones. These structures are among the
most complex known in biology to date, but show a remarkably simple overall plan, much simpler
for example than the structures of the ribosome or the RNA polymerases that must perform a
complex series of reactions in which the reactants are themselves macromolecules that undergo
very large movements during their respective reactions. The molecular complexes of photo-
synthesis, in contrast, have a relatively simple task that does not require them to move. Their
main role is to maintain light-absorbing and photoprotecting chromophores at exactly the right
distance for eﬃcient energy transfer and charge separation.
   PSII also includes the oxygen-evolving centre with its manganese cofactor that is coor-
dinated to residues in D1 and CP43 (see Fig. 19 d ) but the resolution of current structures will
need to be improved to shed further light on how oxygen is evolved (Ferreira et al. 2004 ; Loll
et al. 2005).


7. G-protein-coupled receptors
Members of the G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) family are found in organisms from yeast
to man. They are involved in sensory perception (smell, sight, taste) and trans-membrane sig-
nalling in hundreds of processes throughout human physiology. Recent atomic structures of the
adenosine A2a receptor (A2aR) (Jaakola et al. 2008) and of b1- and b2-adrenergic receptors (bAR)
(Cherezov et al. 2007 ; Warne et al. 2008) have joined bovine (Palczewski et al. 2000 ; Li et al. 2004)
and squid rhodopsin (Murakami & Kouyama, 2008) structures to give us a good idea of the range
of structural variation in the family. All show the well-known seven-helix bundle structure with
strongly kinked helices 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7, frequently at the position of a conserved proline residue in
the structure (Fig. 20).
   However, only for bovine rhodopsin is direct experimental information available about the
nature of the structural change that triggers G-protein activation. From double electron-electron
resonance (DEER) spectroscopy (Altenbach et al. 2008) together with suggestive crystal struc-
tures of two unliganded opsins (Park et al. 2008 ; Scheerer et al. 2008), it is likely that a y6-Å
outward movement of helix 6 and smaller movements of helices 1, 5 and 7 trigger binding of the
G-protein complex and subsequent signalling. The structure of opsin with a bound 11 residue
C-terminal peptide from Ga (Scheerer et al. 2008) gives a ﬁrst glimpse of how the GPCR
structural change might allow G-protein binding, which leads to GDP/GTP exchange and
subsequent signalling. The peptide binds in a cavity that is opened up by the outward movement
120    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




            (a)                        (b)                      (c)                          (d)

Fig. 20. G-protein-coupled receptors : (a) bovine rhodopsin (1GZM), (b) b1-adrenergic receptor
(2VT4), (c) b2-adrenergic receptor (2RH1) and (d) adenosine A2a receptor (3EML). These four structures
all represent inactive, antagonist-bound, conformations of four diﬀerent G-protein-coupled receptors. The
structures are related as they all have a homologous seven-helix TM bundle, but diﬀer in the details of their
binding sites and structures at both cytoplasmic and extracellular surfaces. A hypothetical mechanism of
activation and signalling to the cytoplasmic abc G-protein complex is described in the text.


of helix 6, and which is non-existent in the ground state rhodopsin structure where 11-cis retinal
occupies the ligand-binding site. A plausible but hypothetical mechanism of coupling the binding
of this C-terminal helix (a5) of Ga to the subsequent GDP/GTP exchange has been proposed,
based on the apparent necessity for a y40x tilt of a5 out of its position in the free Gabccomplex
(Scheerer et al. 2008).
   A comparison of the structure and interactions that high aﬃnity antagonists make in the A2aR
and bAR structures with the chemical formulae of the natural agonists suggests that the ligand
binding site in GPCRs will contract to ﬁt tightly around an agonist on the extracellular side of the
receptor, whereas antagonists will stabilise the unliganded form, which is predominantly inactive
except in those GPCRs with high constitutive activity. In b1AR and b2AR, the hydroxyl groups
of the three serine residues on helix 5 that are known to interact with the two catecholamine
hydroxyl groups of adrenaline are too distant to form direct hydrogen bonds in an atomic model
(Warne et al. 2008) unless the proposed agonist-induced structural change occurs, although there
is also the possibility that water molecules in the ligand-binding site may mediate the interaction.
A similar argument can be made for interaction of the 2k- and 3k-hydroxyl groups of the ade-
nosine agonist in the A2a receptor with the imidizole side-chain of His-278, which is the residue
homologous to the retinal Schiﬀ base residue, Lys-296, on helix 7 in bovine rhodopsin. This
ligand-induced conformational change provides the energy for similar movements of helices 6
and 7 on the intracellular side as seen in rhodopsin and bacteriorhodopsin. Although seven helix
membrane proteins have a rich variety of speciﬁcities and functions, they appear also to have an
underlying mechanistic unity.


8. Membrane enzymes
8.1 Intramembrane proteases
Recent identiﬁcation of intramembrane proteases has revealed a new strategy for cellular
regulation where inactive transmembrane protein precursors in their membrane bound form
                                                             Structures of membrane proteins    121

are activated by intramembrane proteolytic cleavage. Proteolysis results in the release of
cytoplasmic, luminal or extracellular domains that move to new locations where they can carry
out their biological function (Weihofen & Martoglio, 2003 ; Wolfe & Kopan, 2004 ; Freeman,
2008). Diﬀerent intramembrane protease families, classiﬁed as serine, aspartyl or metallo-
proteases have been identiﬁed in all kingdoms of life (cysteine intramembrane proteases
have not yet been found). Intramembrane proteases have multiple TM helices with active site
residues sequestered within distinct TM domains. Intramembrane proteolysis has so far
been implicated in diverse cellular processes including diﬀerentiation, the unfolded protein
response, lipid metabolism, signal peptide processing and, in prokaryotes, generation of
peptide pheromones, response to extracellular stress and pathogenesis (Wolfe & Kopan, 2004 ;
Freeman, 2008). Structures of intramembrane proteases are important for understanding how
catalysis occurs within the membrane using the same or similar mechanisms to those used by
soluble proteases.


8.1.1 Rhomboids
Rhomboids are six TM domain serine proteases, the ﬁrst of which was identiﬁed originally as a
component of the EGF receptor-signalling pathway in Drosophila and named after the appear-
ance of wing vein patterns in developmental mutants. Since then they have been shown to play a
major role in bacterial quorum sensing and protozoal pathogenesis (Urban et al. 2001 ; O’Donnell
et al. 2006 ; Stevenson et al. 2007). In vivo and in vitro cleavage assays of diﬀerent rhomboids have
identiﬁed key residues in catalysis and point to a serine-histidine dyad, similar to that formed in
the subtilisin protease family (Urban et al. 2002 ; Lemberg et al. 2005 ; Urban & Wolfe, 2005).
Since the hydrolysis of peptide bonds requires water, the concept of proteolysis in the membrane
has remained uncertain, particularly the question of whether the active site resides within the
membrane or at the surface where water molecules are plentiful. The crystal structures of pro-
karyotic rhomboids from E. coli and Haemophilus inﬂuenzae show how this is achieved (Wang et al.
2006 ; Wu et al. 2006 ; Ben-Shem et al. 2007 ; Lemieux et al. 2007). In the core, a relatively short
TM helix 4 and an extended loop 3 is surrounded by other helices to create a hydrophilic cavity
that opens to the periplasmic side (Fig. 21 a). The active site serine is located y10 Å into the
bilayer and hydrogen bonded to the conserved histidine. Numerous water molecules are found in
this cavity that is capped by ﬂexible loop 5. It is likely that this loop can ﬂip spontaneously (Wang
& Ha, 2007 ; Wang et al. 2007). An interesting feature of the rhomboid structure is that loop 1 is
placed outside the helix bundle, and forms a hairpin that is partially buried in the membrane.
Mutation in this loop renders the enzyme inactive, but its exact function remains to be deter-
mined. Four structures of rhomboids have been solved in diﬀerent detergents and space groups
and their comparison has helped to explain the possible mechanism of substrate recruitment.
The greatest variation is observed in helix 5, a non-conserved TM helix exposed to the lipid
bilayer. Together with loop 5, helix 5 may be involved in recruitment of substrate and presenting
it to the active site. In the absence of a rhomboid structure with a substrate or inhibitor, the
mechanism of catalysis and regulation remains largely unknown.


8.1.2 Site-2 protease
First identiﬁed in the regulation of cholesterol biosynthesis and uptake, site-2 proteases (S2P) are
also involved in ER stress signalling, response to periplasmic stress in E. coli, and sporulation in
122    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




                            (a)                                               (b)



Fig. 21. Structure of intramembrane proteases : (a) rhomboid GlpG (2IC8) and (b) site-2 protease (3B4R).
(a) Rhomboids are serine proteases that utilise a catalytic dyad of serine and histidine (red) for hydrolysis of
peptide bonds in the membrane. GlpG, a prokaryotic rhomboid from E. coli represents the core architecture
with a bundle of six TM helices. A relatively short helix 4 and extended loop 3 (yellow) are placed at the
centre of the molecule surrounded by other TM helices to form a hydrophilic cavity with numerous water
molecules. Loop 5 caps this active site (orange). Loop 1, an essential component but whose function is
unknown lies outside of the helical bundle (magenta). TM helices 1, 3 and 6 provide a structural support
(green). Substrate is thought to enter through an opening between TM helices 2 and 5 (blue). (b) Site-2
protease from M. jannaschii is a zinc containing metalloprotease of unknown biological function. Zinc (red
sphere) is coordinated by conserved histidines and aspartate (magenta). It is likely to be in a tetrahedral
coordination with a water molecule (not observed due to limited resolution) forming the fourth coordi-
nation. TM helices 2, 3 and 4 (yellow) form the core that holds the key residues for catalysis. Discontinuous
part of helix 4 is shown in brown. TM1 with a mixture of a-helix and b-strand is shown in blue. Outer
helices TM 5 and 6 are in green.



Bacillus subtilis (Brown & Goldstein, 1999 ; Rudner et al. 1999 ; Ye et al. 2000 ; Yu & Kroos, 2000 ;
Alba et al. 2002). In contrast to rhomboids that do not require substrate trimming, substrate
proteolysis by S2P requires prior cleavage by another protease called site-1 protease. S2P con-
tains the signature HExxH sequence. The active site zinc is coordinated by histidines on one TM
helix together with a conserved aspartate in another TM helix. These active site residues resemble
those in thermolysin, a soluble metalloprotease. Activation by glutamate of a water molecule
bound to zinc results in nucleophilic attack on the scissile peptide bond. These conserved
sequences and the zinc ion are predicted to be within the bilayer.
   The crystal structure of the core domain of S2P from M. jannaschii (MjS2P) at 33 Å reveals a
mixture a-helices and b-strands (Feng et al. 2007). As expected for a metalloprotease, zinc is
found coordinated to the histidines and aspartate. The present structure with its approximate
membrane boundary places them y14 Å into the bilayer (Fig. 21b). Six TM helices form the core
of MjS2P. The conserved HExxH motif is found in TM2. Helix 4 is not continuous but is divided
into two halves (H4a and H4b) by a nine-amino acid bulge. The aspartate that coordinates zinc is
found at the N-terminus of H4b. Such discontinuous helices are not uncommon in membrane
proteins but are most frequently found in transport proteins where they transiently coordinate
                                                              Structures of membrane proteins      123

ions. A conserved asparagine is placed close to the active site, which might be essential to
neutralise the negative charge during hydrolysis.
   Two independent molecules in the asymmetric unit of Mj2P show remarkable diﬀerences in
the outer helices TM1 and 6 and shed light on possible structural changes during activity. It has
been speculated that these molecules might represent open and closed states. Movement of these
helices, like that of TM5 in rhomboids, has been proposed to act as a gate for substrate binding
and release. An intriguing feature in the structure of MjS2P is the TM1 segment that has been
modelled to consist of an a-helix and a b-strand. Such a mixture of secondary structure in the
lipid bilayer is very unusual for a membrane protein. b-Strands have been found in other
membrane proteins but only at the interface between bilayer and bulk solution. Hence, it is hard
to imagine how a mixed structure as in MjS2P can form a stable entity in the lipid bilayer.
However, structures of membrane proteins have provided many surprises before, so it may be
true that MjS2P does have a mixed structure in TM1. Could this be an eﬀect of crystallisation in
detergent or crystal packing ? As the authors have pointed out, the ﬂexibility seen in TM1 and
TM6 might be an eﬀect of non-native detergent environment. It is therefore essential to deter-
mine a structure in the lipid bilayer so that the exact nature of TM1 and probably TM6 can be
conﬁrmed, and the mechanism of proteolysis explored.


8.2 Thiol oxidases
Formation of disulphide bonds is important for stability and correct folding of many proteins, in
particular those that are secreted. In Gram-negative bacteria, the catalysis of disulphide bond
formation occurs in the periplasmic space. In E. coli DsbA, a highly reactive thiol oxidase rapidly
introduces disulphide bonds by thiol exchange into newly folding proteins (Inaba & Ito,
2008). DsbA consists of a thioredoxin-like domain that harbours the conserved active site
(C30-P-X-C33) and an a-helical insertion domain. Reoxidation of DsbA is an essential process
and a membrane enzyme DsbB converts the oxidising equivalent of quinones into reactive
disulphides thereby connecting oxidative protein folding to respiratory pathways. DsbB is a left-
handed four TM a-helix bundle that exposes two pairs of cysteines on its two periplasmic loops
(Fig. 22a). Cysteine 41 and 44 are located in periplasmic loop 1 (PL1) while cysteine 104 and 130
are located in loop 2 (PL2). DsbB and DsbA are dynamic enzymes that can form intramolecular
and intermolecular disulphide bonds resulting in various intermediate states. It is thought that
co-ordinated action of four cysteines in DsbB together with ubiquinone results in oxidation of
DsbA. Thus, it is possible to trap intermediates by mutating cysteine residues to form a stable
DsbB-DsbA complex or a reaction intermediate with an interloop disulphide bond between
C41 and C130 of DsbB. Multiple structures of DsbB alone or in complex with DsbA have
been determined by X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy providing complementary
structural information (Inaba et al. 2006 ; Malojcic et al. 2008; Zhou et al. 2008 ; Inaba et al. 2009).
The NMR structure shows an N-terminal amphipathic helix that lies parallel to the membrane,
which is disordered in the crystal structure. Ubiquinone binds in a groove formed between
TM1 and TM4 close to the cysteines in PL1 (Fig. 22a). The most important region in DsbB
is the periplasmic loop that can be divided into distinct regions starting with a N-terminal
region that lacks any secondary structure and has high mobility. This region is followed by an
amphiphatic helix that is thought to reside in the bilayer. This helix is then followed by PL2 that
lies on top of TM2 so that interloop disulphides between C41 and C130 can be formed (Zhou et al.
2008).
124    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




            (a)                             (b)                                (c)
Fig. 22. Membrane enzymes (a) thiol oxidase DsbB-DSbA (2ZUP), (b) leukotriene LTC4 synthase trimer
(2UUH) and (c) methane monooxygenase MMO (1YEW). Some enzymes are integral membrane proteins
because they have hydrophobic substrates or because they are coupled to components of the electron
transport chain. DsbB-DsbA complex : Disulphide bond formation in nascent polypeptides is catalyzed in
the periplasm of Gram-negative bacteria by the highly reactive enzyme DsbA. DsbB is a left-handed four
TM a-helical membrane protein that regenerates DsbA by reduction of a disulphide bond, followed by
subsequent thiol oxidation in DsbB by ubiquinones. Conserved cysteine residues in DsbA (cys 30 and 33)
and DsbB (cys 41, 44, 104, 130) play a crucial role in regeneration of DsbA by thiol exchange mechanism. It
is possible to trap reaction intermediates of the DsbB-DsbA complex by mutating speciﬁc cysteine residues.
The ﬁgure depicts one such intermediate where Cys33 is mutated to alanine in DsbA and Cys130 to serine in
DsbB (both residues shown as green sticks). This results in an intramolecular disulphide bond (red) between
Cys30 of DsbA and Cys104 of DsbB. Lack of cysteine at position 130 results in inter molecular disulphide
between Cys41 and Cys44 of DsbB (orange). Ubiquinone (brown) is found in a groove between TM1 and
TM4 close to the Cys41 and Cys44. When Cys33 of DsbA attacks the disulphide bond between DsbB-DsbA,
it releases oxidised DsbA. Subsequent thiol exchange within DsbB restores its oxidised state. LTC4 syn-
thase: Membrane proteins involved in eicosanoid and glutathione metabolism are collectively called
MAPEG (membrane associated proteins in eicosianid and glutathione metabolism). They play a key role in
the generation of lipid mediators from arachidonic acid, which is responsible for bronchoconstriction
leading to asthma. In addition, they play a major role in oxidative stress and xenobiotic detoxiﬁcation. The
membrane enzyme LTC4 synthase converts leukotriene A4 to leukotriene C4 by covalent coupling to
glutathione. Like other MAPEG family members, LTC4 synthase is trimeric, with each monomer (cyan, blue
and green) having four TM helices. Glutathione (red) binds at a crevice between two monomers. A deter-
gent molecule (orange) that might mimic a substrate is shown close to glutathione. The structure of LTC4
synthase suggests how glutathione is activated and coupled to the substrate but a deﬁnitive answers await
more biochemical and probably more structural data. Methane monooxygenase : due to its inert nature,
industrial oxidation of methane is an extremely diﬃcult process. Methanotropic bacteria that use methane as
their sole carbon source have evolved enzymes to carry out this diﬃcult oxidation process. Membrane
bound particulate methane monooxygenase is a homotrimer of three subunits giving a molecule with nine
chains altogether (one monomer is shown in colour). Subunits A (dark blue) and C (yellow) together make
up most of the TM domain with 12 (7 from subunit A and 5 from subunit C) helices. Subunit B (magenta)
has two TM helices and a large soluble domain that contains two b-barrels. Three metal centres are
observed in the crystal structure. A mononuclear copper (red) and a dinuclear copper centre (brown) are
found in the soluble barrel domain of subunit B. A zinc ion (green) is found in the membrane coordinated
by residues from subunit A and C. These metal centres must play a major role in activation of oxygen and
subsequent generation of methanol.
                                                           Structures of membrane proteins    125

   Interaction of DsbA with DsbB induces a conformational change in PL2 while very little
change in observed in the rest of protein. The N-terminal section of PL2 that harbours C104 is
accommodated close to C30 of DsbA. This interaction results in separation of DsbB C130 from
C104 and positions it close to C41 for a nucleophilic attack and subsequent disulphide bond
formation. When C33 of DsbA attacks the DsbB-C104 and DsbA-C30 disulphide, oxidised DsbA
is released while subsequent disulphide rearrangement in four cysteines of DsbB aided by ubi-
quinone restores DsbB for yet another cycle.


8.3 Membrane associated proteins in eicosanoid and glutathione metabolism
Lipid mediators derived from the arachidonic acid (AA) cascade are crucial in the defence
repertoire of immune cells. Molecules derived from AA mediate processes of inﬂammation,
fever and pain. Activation of phospholipase A2 results in release of arachidonic acid, which can
be converted by cyclooxygenase, a membrane anchored enzyme, into prostanoids such as
prostaglandins or thromboxane. Alternatively, AA can be converted into 20-carbon unsaturated
fatty acid compounds called leukotrienes (LT) (Bisgaard, 2001). Enzymes involved in the con-
version of AA to LT are called Membrane Associated Proteins in Eicosanoid and Glutathione
metabolism (MAPEG). In humans, the MAPEG family includes the leukotriene C4 synthase
(LTC4S), microsomal prostaglandin E synthase 1 (mPGES1), 5-lipooxygenase activating protein
(FLAP) and the microsomal glutathione S-transferase (mGST). FLAP has no enzyme activity but
provides AA to 5-lipooxygenase. LTC4S is responsible for generation of cysteinyl-leukotriene, a
potent broncho-constricting agent that is upregulated in asthma (Zhu et al. 2005). There are
other cysteinyl-leukotrienes downstream of LTC4 that are not made directly by LTC4S.
mGST enzymes respond to oxidative stress and detoxify xenobiotics (Martinez Molina et al.
2008).
   Proteins belonging to the MAPEG family are trimeric, each monomer having four TM helices.
Except for FLAP, which does not show a glutathione transferase activity, other members pos-
sess an Rx3Nx2E/D motif involved in binding of glutathione. Electron crystallographic studies
of mGST1 provided the ﬁrst structural information on the architecture of the MAPEG family
(Schmidt-Krey et al. 2000 ; Holm et al. 2006), followed by the X-ray structures of LTC4 synthase
(Ago et al. 2007 ; Martinez Molina et al. 2007), FLAP (Ferguson et al. 2007) and the recent EM
structure of mPGES1 ( Jegerschold et al. 2008). The overall TM helical fold is similar in all three
proteins. The structure of FLAP with bound inhibitor deviates considerably from other struc-
tures in the family at the C-terminus of TM4, which could be induced by inhibitor binding. LTC4
synthase has an additional amphiphatic helix that lies outside the putative membrane boundary
and may interact with lipid headgroups.
   Glutathione (GSH) is buried between adjacent monomers, with its c-carboxylate group facing
the polar residues of protein and its thiol group facing the bilayer. This site is close to the
cytoplasmic face of the outer nuclear membrane and ideally placed for release of products (Fig.
22 b). It is covered by the loop connecting helices TM1 and TM2, whose ﬂexibility might be
required during the catalytic cycle. There has been speculation that a detergent molecule found
close to the glutathione-binding site in the structure of LTC4S might resemble a substrate mol-
ecule. Conserved arginines may play a role in enhancing the nucleophilicity of GSH and its
subsequent conjugation to the substrate molecule. The TM helices of MAPEG show similarities
to subunit I of cytochrome oxidase indicating a common evolution of proteins involved in
oxidative stress and electron transfer.
126   K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

8.4 Methane monooxygenase
Many enzymes from prokaryotes and particularly archaea carry out very diﬃcult chemical reac-
tions, which have the potential to be used in industrial applications and bioremediation. One
such enzyme is methane monooxygenase that catalyzes the oxidation of methane (Sullivan et al.
1998 ; Hakemian & Rosenzweig, 2007). Natural gas (principally methane) as an alternative fuel
has gained a lot of attention but the industrial process of methane oxidation is extremely diﬃcult.
Methanotropic bacteria use methane as their sole carbon source and oxidise it to methanol in the
ﬁrst step of metabolism. Methane monooxygenase (MMO) is found either as a soluble enzyme or
as membrane bound particulate methane monooxygenase (pMMO). The levels of the soluble
and the membrane bound forms are regulated by level of copper in the environment (Hakemian
& Rosenzweig, 2007). Understanding pMMO at the molecular level may help design catalysts for
the oxidation of methane.
   The structure of pMMO reveals a homotrimer of three diﬀerent subunits A, B and C, making
nine polypeptides in each molecule (Lieberman & Rosenzweig, 2005). Subunit B forms much of
the soluble domain with a seven-stranded N-terminal b-barrel and an eight-stranded C-terminal
b-barrel. The barrels are connected to two TM helices by a long loop. Subunits A and C with
seven and ﬁve TM helices, respectively, comprise much of the TM domain. The TM helices of
subunit A pack against the TM helices of subunit B. Three metal centres are observed in the
crystal structure. A mononuclear copper centre is found at the surface of the N-terminal barrel
co-ordinated by histidines, 25 Å from the membrane. Also in the N-terminal barrel is a dinuclear
copper centre with similarities to cytochrome oxidase CuA, y10 Å from the membrane. A third
metal centre in the membrane is a zinc ion, co-ordinated by residues from subunits A and C, and
lies y19 Å away from the dinuclear copper centre (Fig. 22c). The observation of zinc in the
structure may be due to the high concentration used in crystallisation. In vivo, this is probably
occupied by copper or iron. It is not clear from the structure how oxidation of methane is
catalyzed (Balasubramanian & Rosenzweig, 2007). Obviously one of these metal centres is in-
volved in activation of oxygen but at this stage there is not enough experimental data to identify
which metal centre is the active site.


8.5 Monotopic membrane proteins
Although this review is focussed on integral, membrane-spanning proteins, there is a consider-
able number of membrane proteins that interact strongly with membranes, while penetrating
only slightly into the surface of the lipid bilayer. The best deﬁnition of such monotopic mem-
brane proteins is that they can be released from the membrane only using detergent, yet do not
span the full width of the lipid bilayer. These proteins can be anchored to the membrane in
diﬀerent ways. For example, they can interact with the lipid headgroups via an amphipathic helix
that is oriented parallel to the surface of the bilayer, or they can have a covalently attached lipid
chain, such as a palmitoyl group or glycosylphosphatylinositol (GPI) or they can have multiple
ionic interactions. The enzyme prostaglandin synthetase (Picot et al. 1994) is monotopic and
interacts with the bilayer through a hydrophobic patch on the surface of the protein. Similarly
cytochrome P450 enzymes (Yano et al. 2004) are found in microsomal or mitochondrial inner
membranes and normally have an N-terminal, non-cleavable membrane insertion sequence,
which acts as an anchor. Carnitine palmitoyltransferase is another monotopic membrane protein
(Rufer et al. 2006), which interacts via hydrophobic and positively charged residues (Rufer et al.
                                                             Structures of membrane proteins     127

2007). Glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, a ﬂavin-linked enzyme in E. coli, essential for
aerobic growth in glycerol (Yeh et al. 2008), is another example. Some proteins whose active sites
are outside the membrane have a predicted TM helix that probably spans the membrane but is
not essential for activity. Structures of some of these proteins with the TM helix deleted include
monoamine oxidase (Binda et al. 2002), signal peptide peptidase (Kim et al. 2008) and pepti-
doglycan glycosyltransferase (Lovering et al. 2007).


9. b-Barrel membrane proteins
Although a-helical structures dominate in membrane proteins (Fig. 1) there exist membrane
proteins with b-strands that, due to restrictions posed by the hydrophobic lipid bilayer, invariably
form barrels. The primary sequences of most b-barrels show non-polar amino acids at every
second residue, facing the hydrophobic lipid environment, while the interior of the barrels are
generally polar creating hydrophilic channels. However, in some cases, the interior is non-polar
in proteins that have evolved to transport hydrophobic substrates. Thus, the environment in the
interior of the barrel allows transport through the centres of the barrels and therefore through
the membrane. This arrangement is in contrast to the b-barrels of soluble proteins, which bury
their non-polar residues at the core of their structure while exposing polar residues to the
aqueous exterior. b-Barrel membrane proteins dominate the outer membrane of Gram-negative
bacteria. They carry out a wide range of functions that include the transport of macromolecules
such as protein, DNA, polysaccharides and lipids. They also act as receptors for bacteriophages.
A few are membrane-anchored enzymes and some are involved in extrusion of drugs and anti-
biotics (Nikaido, 2003). Wza, a polysaccharide transporter is the only known a-helical membrane
spanning protein in the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria (Dong et al. 2006). A possible
explanation for the large number of b-barrels observed in the outer membrane has been attrib-
uted to their less hydrophobic nature, which might aid in eﬃcient transport across inner mem-
brane and periplasmic space without the risk of aggregation. Crystallisation of b-barrel outer
membrane proteins has been found to be much easier than a-helical TM proteins, largely due to
their inherent stability. Numerous structures of b-barrels have been solved even with protein
refolded from inclusion bodies (Gouaux, 1998 ; Buchanan, 1999 ; Schulz, 2002). The smallest b-
barrel membrane protein structure known so far has 8 strands (the smallest b-barrel found in
soluble proteins has 6 strands) while the largest has 24 (Remaut et al. 2008).
   Since the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria has no proton motive force, most
proteins act as passive pores. Some of them form non-selective channels such as OmpF and
OmpC porins with 16-stranded barrels. They transport molecules up to 600 Daltons and show a
slight preference for cations (Cowan et al. 1992; Basle et al. 2006). It has also been shown that
OmpF can transport unfolded polypeptides, a property utilised by colicins (Yamashita et al.
2008). Porins such as LamB (Fig. 23) and ScrY have 18-stranded b-barrels yet have more re-
stricted pores and transport carbohydrates (Schirmer et al. 1995 ; Forst et al. 1998). These classical
porins form SDS stable homotrimers, each monomer having a separate translocation pathway.
Maltoporins have a string of low aﬃnity sugar binding sites lined with aromatic residues termed
the greasy slide, which allows the rapid uptake oligosaccharides. Not all outer membrane proteins
form pores. Some have evolved to perform other biological functions while closing the interior
of the barrel with an intricate hydrogen-bonding network. Proteins with smaller barrels such as
OmpX (Vogt & Schulz, 1999) act as membrane anchors or for adhesion while OmpA, an
abundant protein in E. coli, stabilises the outer membrane and has been used extensively to study
128    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




                      (a)                                          (b)

Fig. 23. Architecture of porins (a) LamB trimer top view and (b) LamB monomer side view (1MAL). Found
abundantly in the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria, b-barrel membrane proteins form the second
major structural class. Depicted in the ﬁgure is a representative outer membrane porin LamB, a trimeric
sugar transporter. Each monomer has an individual transport pathway and transports maltodextrin (red
space ﬁlling model). LamB is an 18-stranded b-barrel with a pore that selects carbohydrates through
interaction with aromatic amino acids. Other classical porins such as OmpF, OmpC, PhoE are also trimers
but have 16 b-strands. All these proteins act as passive pores. The trimers of these proteins show remark-
able stability even in presence of SDS.


protein folding (Pautsch & Schulz, 1998). There also exist many outer-membrane proteins with
no known biological functions, one of which is the 14-stranded b-barrel OmpG, regulated by pH
(Yildiz et al. 2006). Using the b-barrel as an anchor in the membrane, proteins have also evolved
to carry out enzymatic reactions. OmpT, a protease whose catalytic centre protrudes from a 10-
stranded b-barrel to the external medium, is involved in protein degradation (Vandeputte-Rutten
et al. 2001) and OmpLA (Fig. 24 a), a phospholipase that cleaves lipopolysaccharides, forms a 12-
stranded barrel (Snijder et al. 1999).
    Despite lack of an energy source, some outer membrane proteins can perform active transport
by using the energy derived from the cytoplasmic membrane through formation of a transient
complex with inner membrane proteins. These are collectively referred to as belonging to the
TonB-dependent transport system. Such proteins are comprised of an outer membrane receptor
(typically a 22-stranded b-barrel) and inner membrane proteins TonB and ExbBD. Substrates
such as vitamin B12 or iron are scarce in the environment and need to be scavenged by bacteria.
Bacteria synthesise and secrete siderophores that have high aﬃnity for iron and can extract Fe3+
from proteins. Vitamin B12 or iron-siderophore complexes bind to the outer membrane protein,
which has an N-terminal domain (also called TonB binding domain) that acts as a plug or cork to
block the opening on the periplasmic side (Ferguson et al. 1998 ; Locher et al. 1998 ; Buchanan et al.
1999 ; Ferguson et al. 2002 ; Chimento et al. 2003 ; Krieg et al. 2009). The stretch of sequence in
the Ton-B binding domain that binds TonB protein is called the ‘ Ton-B box ’. When substrates
such as vitamin B12 or iron complexes bind, a conformational change in the N-terminal domain
allows the binding of TonB protein from the periplasm that is accompanied by release of
substrate as in FepA (Fig. 24b). Speciﬁc periplasmic proteins then bind and deliver the substrate
                  (a)                                      (b)                                        (c)                             (d)




                                                                                                                                                                                 Structures of membrane proteins
Fig. 24. b-Barrel membrane proteins with diverse biological function (a) OmpLA (1QD5), (b) FepA (1FEP), (c) NalP (1UYN) and (d) VDAC (3EMN). b-Barrel membrane
proteins are not just pore formers. They have evolved to act as receptors, enzymes and to transport speciﬁc molecules. OmpLA (a), is 12 stranded b-barrel that act as a
phospholipase. OmpLA is active only as a dimer, this ﬁgure shows a monomer with its active site serine (red sticks) in complex with an inhibitor hexadecane sulphonyl
ﬂuoride (blue sticks). Transport of molecules such as iron and vitamin B12 against a concentration gradient requires energy. Since the outer membrane is devoid of any
proton motive force, energy is derived from the inner membrane by transient protein-protein interactions, called the TonB-dependent transport system. Outer membrane
proteins that transport these substrates are typically 22-stranded b-barrels. FepA, an iron transporter, is an example (b) of a TonB-dependent transporter. The N-terminal
TonB binding domain (purple) of this protein acts as a plug to prevent leakage. Substrate binding to the outer membrane protein results in a conformational change of the
TonB binding domain that triggers binding of TonB and subsequent release of substrate. Encoded in a single polypeptide chain, autotransporters have a pore forming b-
barrel and a passenger domain that is released to external medium by self-cleavage. NalP from Neisseria meningitis is one such protein (c) that shows the N-terminal passenger
domain (red). b-barrel proteins are also found in the outer membranes of mitochondria and chloroplast. The structure of the voltage dependent anion channel (VDAC)
from mitochondria reveals a 19-stranded b-barrel. Although, adjacent b-strands in trans-membrane proteins normally pair in antiparallel orientation, the ﬁrst and last
strands of VDAC are parallel, which is the ﬁrst time this has been observed in a b-barrel membrane protein. An N-terminal helix (yellow) is found submerged halfway
through the barrel. This helix has been implicated in voltage sensing, but the biological role of membrane potential in mitochondrial outer membranes and the orientation




                                                                                                                                                                                 129
of VDAC is unclear.
130   K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

to dedicated inner membrane transporters for its passage to the cytoplasm. The exact mechanism
of energy transfer to the outer membrane b-barrel from the inner membrane remains to be
elucidated.
   The presence of an outer membrane provides the bacterium with a deﬁnitive barrier against
foreign particles but it also means that the secretion of macromolecules requires sophisticated
machinery to cross two membranes. At least six diﬀerent transport systems, designated as Type I
to VI secretion systems, have been reported in Gram-negative bacteria. These range from multi-
subunit complexes to simplistic single protein components (Chen et al. 2005 ; Bingle et al. 2008 ;
Gatsos et al. 2008). In type III and IV secretion systems, the architecture extends beyond the
outer membrane towards the target cells to release eﬀector molecules (Chen et al. 2005 ; Marlovits
et al. 2006). The type I and V systems have relatively simple architecture with three and one
subunit protein components, respectively. The type I system has an inner membrane transporter,
a fusion protein and outer membrane b-barrel. TolC, a multifunctional membrane protein in-
volved in extrusion of drugs and proteins, forms the outer membrane component of the type I
system in E. coli. Each monomer of TolC contributes four strands to form a 12-stranded barrel
(Koronakis et al. 2000). The interior of the barrel is wide and without any constriction. The
periplasmic domain of TolC forms a a-helical tunnel with an internal cavity of y20 Å diameter.
This domain interacts with inner membrane transport proteins such as AcrB (mentioned in
section 3.2) or HlyB, either directly or through a periplasmic protein, allowing the bacterium to
translocate appropriate polypeptides through the periplasm.
   The type V transport system involves a single polypeptide chain that forms a b-barrel trans-
location domain and a passenger domain that is transported. After the passenger domain has
crossed the outer membrane, self-cleavage results in its release to the external medium as in NalP
(Fig. 24 c). Multiple structures of translocation domains (b-barrels with 12 strands) have been
reported with a a-helix from the passenger domain residing in the barrel (Oomen et al. 2004 ;
Meng et al. 2006 ; Barnard et al. 2007). It is unclear how the transport occurs, but the b-barrel after
the translocation of the passenger domain remains in the outer membrane with no apparent
function. Since they do not require a signal sequence and probably no other protein component
for transport, they have been called autotransporters.
   On a similar theme, there also exist two-partner secretion pathways where the b-barrel and the
passenger domain are secreted as separate entities rather than as a single polypeptide observed in
autotransporters. This superfamily includes TpsB transporters where TpsB forms the b-barrel
and is involved in secretion of large ‘ TpsA ’ proteins involved in various biological function
including adhesion, cytolysis and host cell invasion as well as proteins involved in folding and
insertion of outer-membrane proteins (Omp85 family). Presence of polypeptide-transport-as-
sociated (POTRA) domains at their N-terminus is a unique feature that is postulated to aid in
protein interaction. FhaC, a member of Omp85-TpsB superfamily, has a 16-stranded b-barrel
with a 20 residue long a-helix traversing the barrel (Clantin et al. 2007). It is thought that the
interaction of TpsA protein through POTRA domain promotes the translocation and the a-helix
acts as a plug subsequent to translocation.
   b-barrel membrane proteins have also been found in membranes of mycobacteria and related
bacteria. The structure of MspA from Mycobacterium smegmatis reveals an octamer forming a 16-
stranded b-barrel (Faller et al. 2004). The interior of the barrel is polar and probably creates a path
for mycobacterial drug eﬄux. A recent addition to the growing list of b-barrel proteins is an
outer membrane protein from the thermophilic bacterium Thermus thermophilus, called TtoA
(Brosig et al. 2009). It is an eight-stranded b-barrel predicted to function in adhesion.
                                                             Structures of membrane proteins    131

   Endo-symbiotic theory predicts the existence of b-barrels in the outer membranes of mito-
chondria and chloroplast. The ﬁrst structure of a eukaryotic b-barrel, the voltage-dependent
anion channel (VDAC) from mitochondria, proved their existence (see Fig. 24d ). VDAC has
been implicated in mitochondrial permeability with a role in prevention of apoptosis. Structure
of VDAC determined by X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy reveals a 19-stranded
b-barrel, a unique feature since most b-barrel membrane proteins known thus far have an even
number of strands (Bayrhuber et al. 2008 ; Hiller et al. 2008 ; Ujwal et al. 2008). The ﬁrst and last
strands of VDAC are paired parallel to each other (strands are antiparallel in all other b-barrels).
The N-terminal segment of VDAC adopts a helical conformation submerged halfway through
the pore and restricts the cavity (Fig. 24 d ). The N-terminal segment has been implicated in
voltage sensing. A possible interaction site on VDAC for Bcl-XL, an anti-apoptotic protein has
been revealed by NMR spectroscopy (Hiller et al. 2008).


10. Magnesium transport proteins
Magnesium is an essential cation involved in various biochemical reactions. It is the main counter
ion for GTP and ATP and it maintains the structural integrity of membranes and ribosomes. The
majority of Mg2+ in the cytoplasm exists in complex with nucleotides, but the free ionic con-
centration is y05 mM. In solution, Mg2+ forms hexacoordinated bonds with the oxygen of
water molecules and has the largest hydrated radius (476 Å) of any biologically relevant cation,
but the smallest ionic radius (065 Å). In comparison to other cations such as Na+, K+ or Ca2+,
the rate of water exchange in hydrated Mg2+ is very slow (Maguire & Cowan, 2002). Such a rigid
structure of Mg2+ is utilised in many biological reactions but a protein that transports Mg2+
requires a mechanism to strip strongly bound water molecules and transport a small-dehydrated
cation. Mg2+ transport proteins have been classiﬁed into three families based on sequence
homology, namely CorA, MgtE and MgtA/B. Of these only the MgtA/B family has an ATP
binding domain and members have been classiﬁed as P-type ATPases. CorA and MgtE are
probably channels but this remains to be veriﬁed (Kehres & Maguire, 2002 ; Maguire, 2006).

10.1 CorA
The superfamily of CorA includes proteins of prokaryotic origin (identiﬁed as cobalt resistant
mutants), mitochondrial Mrs2 and plasma membrane Alr1p (for aluminium resistance). The
CorA superfamily is characterised by the presence of GMN and MPEL motifs. The crystal
structure of CorA from Thermotoga maritima (Fig. 25a), solved by three diﬀerent groups, reveals a
homopentamer with a large cytoplasmic domain and a transmembrane domain consisting of 10
helices, two from each monomer (Eshaghi et al. 2006 ; Lunin et al. 2006 ; Payandeh & Pai, 2006).
All three structures probably represent a closed state of the channel. The amino terminal cyto-
plasmic domain resembles a funnel. Its structure represents a new fold made of a seven-stranded
mixed b-sheet sandwiched between two set of a-helices (helices 1, 2, 3 and helices 4, 5, 6).
Conserved residues from the relatively long helices 5 and 6 form an acidic ring. The interior of
the cytoplasmic domain is lined by residues from helix 7 (the stalk helix), which extends into the
membrane with a kink to form the pore helix TM1. A short periplasmic loop that contains the
MPEL motif and is disordered in all structures connects TM1 and TM2. TM2 surrounds the pore
helix and ends in the cytoplasm with a KKKKWL motif that lies perpendicular to the membrane
and possibly interacts with lipids. Together these lysines and those from the stalk helix account
132    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




                           (a)                                           (b)
Fig. 25. Magnesium transport proteins (a) pentameric CorA (2IUB) and (b) dimeric MgtE (2YVX). Side
and periplasmic views of CorA: Pentameric CorA is made up of a large cytoplasmic domain and a TM
domain with 10 helices, 2 from each monomer (brown). The stalk helix (yellow) that connects the two
domains might play a role in transmitting a signal to the TM domain. Helices 5 (cyan) and 6 (pink) and the
rest of cytoplasmic domain (green) acts as a divalent cation sensor (bound magnesium ions shown as red
spheres). The C-terminal extension of TM2 domain that has a KKKKWL motif (blue) forms part of a basic
sphincter ring. There is no bound Mg2+ in the pore and this structure probably represents a closed state.
Side and periplasmic views of MgtE : In contrast to CorA, MgtE is a homodimer with 10 TM helices
(brown), 5 from each monomer. The cytoplasmic domain consists of a superhelical N domain (green) and a
cystathionine-b-synthase domain (cyan). The two plug helices (yellow) connect the TM and cytoplasmic
domains. Magnesium ions (red spheres) are found at the interfaces between domains. One Mg2+ ion has
been modelled in the pore near a conserved aspartate but due to moderate resolution the exact nature of the
bound ion or the co-ordination geometry cannot be determined. Although diﬀerent in architecture, the
cytoplasmic domains of CorA and MgtE both act as divalent cation sensors. The loss of ion co-ordination
due to lower intracellular Mg2+ concentration results in movement of the stalk helix in CorA or the
connecting helix in MgtE, which transmits the signal to the TM domain. It is important to note that the
bound cations in the cytoplasmic domains are at the interfaces of the various subdomains in both proteins.
Except for a single aspartate in MgtE, hydrophobic residues line the pores of both proteins.
                                                             Structures of membrane proteins    133

for 30 positive charges, positioned above the acidic ring and just below the pore, giving rise to a
region called the basic sphincter. Helix TM1 is twisted along the ﬁvefold axis and tapers near the
periplasmic surface (Fig. 25 a). The pore forming helix TM1 is devoid of any charged residues, so
the pore is predominantly lined by backbone carbonyls and amides along with a few serine and
threonine hydroxyl groups. Only two residues (proline and phenylalanine) are conserved in the
pore helix of the corA family. The pore helix is capped at the periplasmic end by asparagine from
a GMN motif and at the cytoplasmic end by a conserved aspartate. The diameter of the pore
varies from 6 to 25 Å, being smallest at the cytoplasmic end. Cationic hexamines that have
similar size and shape to Mg2+ inhibit CorA, suggesting that a fully hydrated Mg2+ binds initially
probably via the MPEL motif. The cation then has to travel across the bilayer losing its water on
the way.
    In the present structures no density for Mg2+ is found in the pore. However, three constric-
tions are found in the pore that may play a role in selecting and conducting Mg2+. At the
periplasmic end, the side chains of asparagines from each monomer face towards the pore and
may toggle up and down to let the ions through. The second constriction made of threonine and
methionine residues may play a role in dehydrating Mg2+. Towards the cytoplasmic end,
hydrophobic leucine and methionine residues constrict the channel to y25 Å. Leucine plugs
the pore and may play a role in gating. In fact, replacement of leucine with smaller hydrophobic
amino acids results in an increase in the open probability of the channel (Payandeh et al. 2008).
    Below this leucine, there is a ring of conserved aspartate residues that might interact with
incoming magnesium ions and deliver them to the cytoplasmic domain. The acidic and hydro-
philic residues in helix 7 may function in attracting the cation as an electrostatic sink. However in
the closed state, residues from neighbouring helices neutralise them. In the absence of an open
state structure for CorA, structures of the cytoplasmic domain in the presence of divalent cations
and biochemical analysis provide insights about sensing of intracellular Mg2+ concentration and
signal transmission to the TM domain (Lunin et al. 2006 ; Payandeh & Pai, 2006). In the closed
state, the cytoplasmic domain of CorA has a basic ring followed by an acidic ring below the pore.
Divalent cations at the interface of individual domains hold them tightly together. When the
Mg2+ ion concentration is low in the cytoplasm, it is thought to lead to a loss of ion co-
ordination in the cytoplasmic domain, followed by charge repulsion of the basic sphincter and
the acidic ring resulting in opening of the channel, which is likely to involve a rotational and
tilting movement of the stalk and other TM helices (Payandeh et al. 2008). The structures of
CorA have been informative but do not provide answers to the questions of selectivity and
conduction. A structure with a cation hexamine might provide a ﬁrst clue about the entry of
cation into the pore, followed by mutants selected to hold the channel in an open state, a scenario
similar to MscS. Calcium, although found in lower concentrations in the cytoplasm binds to the
same sites in the cytoplasmic domain as Mg2+, raising the question of how the competition
between these ions is overcome.


10.2 MgtE
The crystal structure of MgtE from Thermus thermophilus at 35 Å reveals (Fig. 25b) a homodimer
with each monomer contributing ﬁve helices, in straight contrast to the pentameric CorA
channel that has the same number of helices altogether (Hattori et al. 2007). The N-terminal
cytosolic domain of MgtE consists of a superhelical N-domain and tandemly repeated cy-
stathionine-b-synthase (CBS) domain (Fig. 25 b). The N-domain is a right-handed a-helical
134   K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

bundle made of ten helices. Duplicated CBS domains have been observed in other membrane
proteins and are known to play a regulatory role (Ignoul & Eggermont, 2005). Numerous acidic
residues are clustered at the interface between the N and CBS domains. The cytoplasmic domain
connects to the TM domain by a connecting helix (also called the plug helix) that lies perpen-
dicular to the membrane (yellow in Fig. 25b).
   The ﬁve TM helices are connected by loops L0 to L4. Loops 1 and 4 form short helices H1b
and H4b. Most of the TM helices are kinked at glycine or proline residues. TM2 is surrounded by
another four helices and does not traverse the membrane completely, thus accommodating the
non-helical loop L1 to form the periplasmic entrance. The connecting helix interacts with TM2,
TM5 and H4b through van der Waals interaction. Highly conserved acidic residues are clustered
in connecting helix and in the loops of the TM helices. Residues from TM2 and TM5 with some
contribution from TM1 form the ion conduction pathway. Except for a conserved aspartate in
the middle of the bilayer, the pore is lined mostly by hydrophobic amino acids and their main
chain carbonyls. The pore is y30 Å long and 6 Å in diameter close to the cytosol where a
number of hydrophilic residues compensate for the energetic cost of dehydration. The interac-
tion of the connecting helix with the TM helices brings together the two TM5 helices and
probably ﬁxes the pore in a closed state.
   At the present resolution it is not possible to assign densities to Mg2+ ions with conﬁdence.
One such density has been tentatively assigned as Mg2+ ion in the pore close to aspartate.
Four other Mg2+ ions have been assigned at interfaces between the CBS and N domains and
the connecting helix. These cytoplasmic Mg2+ ions can be assigned with some conﬁdence
based on the structure of the isolated cytoplasmic domain of MgtE in the presence or absence of
Mg2+. These Mg2+ ions might stabilise the interaction between the N and CBS domains and
ﬁx the connecting helix for its interaction with TM2, TM5 and H4b. In a similar way to
CorA, there has been speculation about the mechanism of gating based on the structure of
the isolated cytoplasmic domain in the presence or absence of Mg2+ and by MD stimulation
(Hattori et al. 2007 ; Ishitani et al. 2008). In the presence of Mg2+ (as in the crystal structure),
the CBS domain tightly dimerises, ﬁxing the connecting helix to interact with the TM
domain and thereby close the pore. In the absence of Mg2+, the dimer interface of the CBS
domain loosens, allowing the possible rotation of the connecting helices so that they swing away
from each other. This is probably followed by conformational change in the TM helices to open
the pore. It is not surprising that two distinct families of Mg2+ transport proteins utilise similar
mechanisms for sensing intracellular Mg2+ ions although their TM domain architecture is dis-
tinct. It is not clear whether MgtE acts as a channel or a transporter ? In the absence of a
functional assay but with structural similarity to the secondary active transporter YiiP (Lu & Fu,
2007), it is tempting to believe that MgtE is also an active transporter.



11. Pore-forming toxins
A large family of proteins, secreted as soluble monomers can oligomerise to form pores on target
cells. They are collectively called pore-forming toxins (PFT). They can be classiﬁed based on
their a-helical or b-barrel structures as a-PFT or b-PFT. Both classes of protein are thought to
undergo sequential steps from a soluble monomer to binding, oligomerisation and penetration
into the target cell membrane. Many such toxins are secreted by bacterial pathogens but have
also evolved in higher animals. Members of a-PFT include colicins and cytolysins (ClyA) of
                                                                Structures of membrane proteins      135




                                 (a)                                    (b)
Fig. 26. Pore forming toxins a) ClyA (2WCD) b) a-HL (7AHL). (a) Side and top view of cytolysin A : in its
membrane bound form, ClyA is a dodecameric a-helical pore-forming toxin. One subunit is highlighted to
show the three-helix bundle. Helices B (green), C (yellow) and F (cyan) form the wall of the pore. Helix A
(blue) and a short region of helix C comprise the membrane-inserted part. (b) Side and top view of
a-hemolysin : a-HL is a b-barrel pore-forming toxin. The monomer of a-HL consists of the rim and amino
latch domain (green) and a stem domain (blue) that forms the barrel. Each monomer contributes two
b-strands to form a heptameric barrel.


E. coli, cry toxins of Bacillus thuringiensis, exotoxin A of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and actinoporins
of sea anemones. Anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-x has a similar structure to colicins but its
relevance to pore formation remains to be elucidated (Anderluh & Lakey, 2008). b-PFT include
a-hemolysin (a-HL) from Staphylococcus aureus, aerolysin from Aeromonas hydrophila, the anthrax
protein antigen, the B. thuringiensis delta endotoxins and the cholesterol dependent cytolysins
(Gouaux, 1998 ; Iacovache et al. 2008). Membrane attack complex proteins of the complement
and perforin family have been predicted to form b-barrel pores. Thus, similar principles have
been exploited by bacterial pathogens as well as higher eukaryotes either at the onset of infection
or as a defence mechanism. It has been speculated that these toxins have diﬀerent oligomeric
states ranging from a monomer (colicin) to large assemblies (cholesterol dependent cytolysins).
The absence of structures in a biologically relevant form limits the information on the oligomeric
states but it is likely that many if not all these toxins must associate to form pores. Structures of
136   K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

ClyA and a-HL that have been crystallised and solved in the presence of detergent are rep-
resentative of membrane inserted a- and b-PFTs, respectively (Song et al. 1996 ; Mueller et al.
2009).
   In the presence of detergent, monomeric ClyA undergoes a massive structural transformation
and oligomerises into a dodecameric pore (Fig. 26 a). In its soluble form the ClyA monomer
comprises four a-helices (A, B, C and F), a hydrophobic b-hairpin ﬂanked by two short helices
that form the head domain and the C-terminal helix G. A kink at a conserved proline in helix A
separates it into helices A1 and A2. The head domain with its hydrophobic residues is thought to
interact with the membrane initially and subsequent conformational change results in an all
a-helical protein devoid of any b-sheets (Mueller et al. 2009). Translocation of helix A results in
a conversion in the membrane form to a three-helix bundle and the region that comprised A2
refolds into an extension of helix B. The long helices B, C and F form the wall of the pore and
the top is constricted by the N-terminus of helix A.
   a-HL is one of the best-studied toxins that oligomerises to form a heptamer in the membrane
(Fig. 26 b). Two b-strands from each soluble monomer associate in the membrane to form a large
water-ﬁlled 14-TM b-barrel (Song et al. 1996). In the eukaryotic cell membrane a-HL pores
release metabolites and ions, eventually leading to host cell lysis. Unlike ClyA, a-HL does not
undergo such a large change in structure between its monomeric soluble form and that of
membrane-inserted oligomer.


12. Key technologies
The enormous success of membrane protein structure determination has depended on a host of
technical developments. No review on membrane protein structure would be complete without a
brief mention of the key methods that have been developed to obtain puriﬁed proteins and
determine their structures. We highlight here only a few aspects of expression and puriﬁcation, as
there are several recent papers that describe or review diﬀerent approaches (Reeves et al. 2002 ;
Opekarova & Tanner, 2003; Kost et al. 2005 ; Sorensen & Mortensen, 2005 ; Midgett & Madden,
2007 ; Junge et al. 2008).


12.1 Membrane protein expression and purification
Expression systems have been developed to overcome some of the problems encountered
during early attempts to overexpress membrane proteins. The need for speciﬁc membrane
protein insertion machinery has often limited the capacity of a host cell to produce large
quantities of correctly folded membrane proteins without toxic overload. Many over-
expressed membrane proteins form inclusion bodies when expressed in E. coli, and even cor-
rectly inserted overexpressed membrane proteins can be trapped in the secretory pathway of
eukaryotic cells in a non-functional state (Tate, 2001). Because E. coli is most easily handled and
has been used in screening the expression of large numbers of membrane proteins identiﬁed
in prokaryotic genomes, it has been the most productive expression system so far. However,
speciﬁc post-translational modiﬁcations such as glycosylation or the need for speciﬁc lipids have
made the expression of eukaryotic proteins in E. coli more problematic, probably due to incorrect
folding. The structures of only two eukaryotic membrane proteins produced in E. coli have been
solved, both membrane associated proteins in eicosanoid and glutathione (MAPEG) metabolism
(Ferguson et al. 2007; Jegerschold et al. 2008 ; see section 8.3). More successful expression of
                                                             Structures of membrane proteins    137

functional eukaryotic membrane proteins has been obtained using yeast, insect and mammalian
cells. Protein structures using material from eukaryotic expression systems have included the
voltage-gated potassium channels (Long et al. 2005 a), G-protein-coupled receptors (Cherezov et al.
2007 ; Jaakola et al. 2008 ; Warne et al. 2008), aquaporins (Hiroaki et al. 2006 ; Tornroth-Horseﬁeld
et al. 2006 ; Horseﬁeld et al. 2008), P-glycoprotein (Aller et al. 2009) and P-type ATPase (Pedersen
et al. 2007). Most of these have used yeast or baculovirus mediated expression in insect cells. The
only structure of an over-expressed membrane protein from mammalian cells (COS cells) is that
of recombinant rhodopsin, a success presumably aided by prior biochemical and crystallisation
knowledge and the use of micro-crystallography (Standfuss et al. 2007). To overcome the toxic
eﬀects during over-expression, cell-free translation systems have been advocated ( Junge et al.
2008). Although there are numerous reports describing the production of milligram amounts of
functional protein, only one structure (of EmrE) has been solved from material obtained from a
cell-free translation system (Chen et al. 2007).
    The stability of membrane proteins is often dramatically decreased upon solubilisation
from the membrane, even in relatively mild detergents such as dodecylmaltoside. Fast puriﬁ-
cation strategies involving one or two steps are therefore advantageous and aﬃnity tags
have provided the most successful method to achieve rapid high enrichment in a single step.
Selective enrichment of functional protein through the use of a ligand aﬃnity column
where possible is also a great advantage as this selectively puriﬁes only correctly folded mem-
brane proteins. The choice of detergent crucially inﬂuences the functional state of protein
and the ability to obtain crystals that diﬀract well, so it is critical to screen a large number of
detergents to ﬁnd the best ones. Conventionally, the behaviour of membrane proteins in par-
ticular detergents has been tested by puriﬁcation, especially size-exclusion chromatography,
followed by functional assays and crystallisation. However, the ability to make ﬂuorescent fusion
proteins, in combination with size-exclusion chromatography, now allows easy and rapid
screening of detergents for a particular protein without the need for puriﬁcation (Kawate &
Gouaux, 2006).
    One of the major obstacles with many membrane proteins is the presence of multiple con-
formational states in solution. A particular conformational state can often be selected by use of
inhibitors or substrate analogues as described for many transporters (Pebay-Peyroula et al. 2003 ;
Locher, 2008 ; Toyoshima, 2008). A relatively new approach is to identify mutations that pro-
mote both a particular conformational state and improved stability in comparison with the wild-
type protein, named conformational thermostabilisation (Serrano-Vega et al. 2008). One of
the earliest examples of a single mutation that decreased conformational ﬂexibility while also
increasing stability was found in LacY (Smirnova & Kaback, 2003). This application of system-
atic mutagenesis coupled with an appropriate ligand-binding assay has resulted in stable
GPCRs which otherwise have a limited half-life in detergent micelles (Fig. 27) (Magnani et al.
2008 ; Serrano-Vega et al. 2008 ; Shibata et al. 2009). The relative simplicity of this approach,
though it can be laborious to execute, makes it applicable to any membrane protein with a
binding assay.


12.2 Three-dimensional crystallisation and X-ray crystallography
Once a membrane protein has been puriﬁed in a functional, stable and monodisperse state, 3D
crystals may be relatively easily obtained but membrane protein crystals are often very small and
disordered. The properties of the detergent and its ﬁnal concentration are especially important
138    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




                                      (a)                                                 (b)

Fig. 27. Some membrane protein structures are partially perturbed in detergent micelles. Most membrane
proteins have been crystallised in the presence of detergent, which is not a native environment. There are a
few examples where the presence of detergents and strenuous eﬀorts in crystallisation have caused non-
native structures to form well diﬀracting crystals. (a) The small multi-drug transporter EmrE normally exists
as an antiparallel dimer in the membrane as well as in detergent micelles (Fig. 14 c). However, in one of the
crystal forms obtained by 3D crystallisation, TM helices 1 to 3 from each monomer (blue and yellow) pack
against each other to form a dimer, similar to that found in the native structure obtained in presence of
substrate or in a lipid bilayer (Ubarretxena-Belandia et al. 2003 ; Chen et al. 2007 ; Fig. 14 c). However the TM
4 helices (red) are directed entirely away from the dimer core in all the monomers of the asymmetric unit. It
is possible that the low pH used for crystallisation promotes disruption of the normal helix bundle and that
contacts made by TM4 results in a well-ordered lattice. (b) Four independent molecules of b1 adrenergic
receptor are observed in one crystal form. In two of these molecules, the N-terminus of TM helix 1,
representing about 10 amino acids, adopts a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent conformation from the structure of the
two other molecules that represent the antagonist-bound state. The ﬁgure shows an overlay of molecules A
and B (aquamarine), with the 60x-kinked conformation of the N-terminus of TM1 in molecule A coloured
in red and the correct, non-kinked conformation of TM1 in molecule B in aquamarine. TM1 in GPCRs is
the most distant helix from both the ligand binding and the G-protein binding sites and such distortion is
certainly a result of crystallisation.



(Ostermeier & Michel, 1997 ; Kuhlbrandt, 1988 ; Prive, 2007). It is often necessary to screen a
large number of crystallisation conditions and make many trips to synchrotrons.
   New strategies developed over the last 10 years increase the probability of obtaining good
diﬀracting crystals. Michel (1983) originally distinguished type I (stacks of 2D layers growing in
the third dimension) from type II (involving contacts principally between hydrophilic parts of
the protein) crystals. With conventional vapour diﬀusion methods, type II crystals are more
commonly observed. Since detergents form a belt around solubilised membrane proteins,
detergents that form small micelles have been most successful in obtaining high-resolution
structures with type II crystals. However, many proteins are stable only in detergents with large
micelles, so diﬀerent approaches are required in such cases. It is the size of the protein relative to
the size of the detergent micelle that is the key factor. Dodecylmaltoside has been used suc-
cessfully to crystallise larger membrane protein complexes, but membrane proteins with only
                                                                 Structures of membrane proteins       139




                   (a)                                                (b)
Fig. 28. Contributions from electron cryomicroscopy. (a) The structure of trimeric light-harvesting com-
plex LHCII from pea (2W7B), determined by electron crystallography of 2D crystals, revealed a three-TM
helical bundle and cofactors (chlorophyll in green and lutenes in salmon). (b) One example of how a low
resolution 3D structure of a complete membrane protein complex, F1Fo-ATPase from bovine mitochon-
dria, determined by single particle electron cryomicroscopy, can help to create a framework for interpreting
the substructures of diﬀerent parts of the whole complex determined by X-ray crystallography or NMR
spectroscopy. Figure from Dickson et al. (2006) with permission.




small hydrophilic domains protruding from their hydrophobic lipid-embedded regions need
detergents with small micelles and possibly other modiﬁcations. These include the use of anti-
bodies or fusion proteins to increase the non-detergent surface area of the protein :detergent
micelle, or modulating the property of detergents by addition of small molecules, or using mixed
detergents. Since membrane proteins have evolved in lipid bilayers and not in detergent micelles
it is also desirable to determine the structure in a more native environment (Fig. 27).
This can be achieved either by 2D crystallisation (see section 12.3), the use of bicelles which are
lipid-enriched detergent micelles (Faham & Bowie, 2002), lipidic cubic phase with appropriate
matrices (Caﬀrey, 2003) or by simple addition of speciﬁc lipids during puriﬁcation and crystallis-
ation (Guan et al. 2007). Success with lipidic cubic phase crystallisation started with proteins from
the bacteriorhodopsin family but has been extended to other membrane proteins including
140    K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson




                        (a)                                             (b)




                        (c)                                             (d)

Fig. 29. NMR structures of membrane proteins (a) OmpX (1Q9F), (b) OmpG (2JQY), (c) diacyl glycerol
(DAG) kinase (2KDC) and (d) phospholamban (1ZLL). All membrane protein structures so far determined
by NMR of detergent solubilised proteins in solution are relatively small structures because the large size of
the protein-detergent micelle complex broadens the NMR spectrum. Two representative NMR structures
of the b-barrel membrane proteins OmpX, an eight-stranded b-barrel, and OmpG, a 14-stranded b-barrel
are shown in (a) and (b), respectively. The largest b-barrel membrane protein structure determined by NMR
is the mitochondrial porin VDAC (see section 9 and Fig. 24d). The structure of diacyl glycerol kinase (c) has
so far been determined only by NMR spectroscopy. It reveals a trimer, each subunit having three TM helices
that all make extensive intersubunit contacts. Phospholamban is a pentameric channel associated with the
sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase, SERCA. These two represent the a-helical membrane protein
structures determined by NMR.
                                                              Structures of membrane proteins      141

GPCRs (e.g. Cherezov et al. 2007). The availability of microfocus beams (1–10 mm diameter)
allows scanning along the crystal to ﬁnd particular areas that are better ordered, as well as
complete 3D data collection using tiny crystals.


12.3 Electron cryomicroscopy
Six membrane protein structures have been determined to better than 35-Å resolution by
electron cryomicroscopy. These are bacteriorhodopsin (Henderson & Unwin, 1975 ; Henderson
et al. 1990), LHCII from green plants (Kühlbrandt et al. 1994 shown in Fig. 28 a), aquaporins
AQP1 (Murata et al. 2000) and AQP0 (Gonen et al. 2004b), glutathione S-transferase (Holm et al.
2006) and prostaglandin E synthetase ( Jegerschold et al. 2008). The highest resolution obtained
to date is 19 Å for AQP0 (Gonen et al. 2004b). Numerous other structures have been deter-
mined to 5- to 9-Å resolution, which allows the architecture of a-helical membrane proteins to
be determined (reviewed by Henderson, 2004). These low-resolution analyses are relatively quick
and frequently very informative about secondary structure. By using other biochemical and
evolutionary data together with hydrophobic moment calculations, these lower resolution maps
can often be used to derive good working models of the structure, e.g. EmrE (Fleishman et al.
2006).
   Structures determined using one technique, can also be used to help solve or validate struc-
tures determined by another technique. It is notable that the X-ray crystallographic structures
of bacteriorhodopsin (section 3.1.2) have all been solved directly or indirectly from the
original structures that were experimentally phased from electron microscope images. The
clear structural relationship between the acetylcholine receptor, determined by electron
microscopy, and the bacterial homopentameric GLIC and ELIC channels, determined by
X-ray crystallography, both validates the relevance of the bacterial structures to the pentameric
ligand-gated channel family in general and conﬁrms the correctness of the EM work (see section
2.2).
   Electron microscopy also has a valuable role to play in other special cases. One of these is the
case of intransigent structures. It is notable that the structure of eukaryotic ab-tubulin (Nogales
et al. 1997) has been determined only by electron crystallography of 2D zinc-induced sheets.
Another role is in the investigation of functional changes in conformation that might disrupt a
3D but not a 2D lattice. The large structural change found in bacteriorhodopsin at the mid-point
of the photocycle in the purple membrane of halobacteria appears either to be prevented by
crystal packing forces in 3D crystals, or to cause disorder so that the nature of the structural
change so far could not be investigated by X-ray diﬀraction. Electron microscopy has been the
only method that has been successful in describing this key structural change at high resolution
(Subramaniam & Henderson, 2000).
   Finally, the growing power of single particle electron cryomicroscopy is allowing the structures
of molecules or molecular complexes of interest to be obtained without making crystals. In this
method, the structure is determined by computational alignment of diﬀerent views of the same
structure after embedding them in a thin ﬁlm of amorphous ice. The method still depends on the
averaging of identical structures, but these no longer need to be crystallised. A good example of
this is shown in Fig. 28 b (Rubinstein et al. 2003). In this case, a relatively low-resolution structure
for the F1Fo-ATPase from bovine mitochondria has allowed many other higher resolution
structures for individual protein components or subcomplexes to be docked into the overall
structure of the whole complex, producing valuable insights.
142   K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

12.4 NMR spectroscopy
Solution NMR, as a method for protein and nucleic acid structure determination, has had con-
siderable impact, especially for smaller proteins or molecules with partially disordered regions
that have inhibited crystallisation attempts. However, NMR of membrane proteins has been
diﬃcult. First, the surrounding detergent micelle frequently doubles the eﬀective size of the
protein so that the tumbling rate is lower and therefore the width of the spectral peaks is larger.
The need for sharper spectral peaks is usually tackled by using an elevated temperature to
increase tumbling rate, but this is hampered for membrane proteins by their thermal instability,
particularly in the smaller detergents that make smaller micelles. Second the chemical shifts for
a-helical residues is concentrated in a smaller region of the spectrum, so that peaks often
overlap, increasing even more the need for sharper peaks. In contrast b-barrel structures have
proved easier to solve by NMR, because of the greater spectral dispersion.
   As a result, there have been only a few structures determined by NMR spectroscopy (see
Fig. 29 for some examples). One of the most interesting is the trimeric membrane enzyme,
diacylglycerol kinase (Fig. 29c), in which the three TM helices in each of the three polypeptide
chains make more intimate contact with helices in the other subunits than they do with helices in
the same subunit (van Horn et al. 2009). In this case, it is notable that, despite great eﬀorts to
make well-ordered crystals, X-ray crystallographic approaches have not yet been successful,
whereas NMR has. A promising recent success has also been the complete assignment of the
backbone spectrum obtained from the halobacterial membrane protein, sR-II, which has seven
TM helices, in micelles of the detergent DHPC at 50 xC (Gautier et al. 2008).
   NMR has also helped greatly in characterising the detailed energetics of helix-helix packing in
simple systems, such as found in the glycophorin A dimer, the ﬁrst NMR structure of a mem-
brane protein, in which the helix packing of the GxxxG motif generates an unusual but very
stable left-handed transmembrane helix dimer (MacKenzie et al. 1997). Finally, solid state NMR
may be developed into a more powerful technique in future, but at present the amount of
information obtainable is limited to analysis of the conformation of speciﬁcally labelled parts of
the structure such as the peptide ligand bound to a peptide receptor (Luca et al. 2003) or retinal
bound to rhodopsin (Ahuja et al. 2009).


13. Future prospects and challenges
In our initial overview, we argued that membrane protein structure determination appeared to
have progressed through three phases, ﬁrst for natural abundance proteins, then those that were
selected from a behavioural screen of expressed genes identiﬁed from bacterial whole genome
sequences and, ﬁnally, those where substantial further work was needed to increase the stability
of the proteins once removed from their lipid environment. Looking to the future, what new
trends can we anticipate ?
   From the range of structural patterns found in membrane proteins so far, the preponderance
of a-helical bundles and b-barrel structures provides one great simpliﬁcation. Both these classes
of structure show a clear distinction between the simple closed secondary structure geometry in
transmembrane regions and the much more convoluted surfaces outside the bilayer region that
includes loops, turns and other complex folds that are typically found in soluble, non-membrane
proteins. Occasional mixed structures are observed (e.g. FepA in Fig. 24b, or NalP in Fig. 24c),
but why have no ab-barrel structures been observed, such as those ﬁrst observed in triose
                                                            Structures of membrane proteins    143

phosphate isomerase, the so-called TIM-barrel, in which an eight-stranded b-barrel is sur-
rounded by eight a-helices ? Why are there no membrane protein structures with complete
b-barrels surrounded by a small number of TM a-helices ? Such structures, once formed, should
be stable in the lipid bilayer. Perhaps the answer is that the distribution of hydrophobic and
hydrophilic residues that would be required for stable insertion makes the polypeptide aggregate
in solution or get stuck inside the ribosome. Such mixed ab structures might still be found in
membrane protein complexes such as the mitochondrial import apparatus (Mokranjac &
Neupert, 2009). Another structural feature that recurs is the existence of breaks in TM a-helices
that contribute to a functional need, for example by providing ion binding sites at exposed
backbone carbonyl groups in the short non-helical regions. Glycine and proline residues in TM
helices also introduce kinks and bends that are important for gating or signal transduction. These
are found in many membrane proteins that function as channels or transporters.
    One future trend will be towards more accurate calculations of folding energy. Theoretical
calculations based on energy minimisation, helped by molecular dynamics, are steadily improving
(Qian et al. 2007). It may soon be possible to extrapolate known structures in the computer in a
reliable way.
    There are only a ﬁnite number of structures in biology. Current estimates suggest about 25 000
human genes of which about one third are membrane proteins. The number of unique mem-
brane protein folds may thus be not much more than a few hundred, so we should have a good
idea of the structures of most of them within the next 10–20 years. Homologous structures could
then be modelled and reﬁned by energy minimisation. At that point, there will still be a need to
determine the structures of complexes, to describe structural changes that are so ﬁnely balanced
that even the most accurate energy calculations will be unable to cope, to investigate mechan-
isms, and above all to design drugs that have practical value in treatment of disease or infection
or as tools to investigate biological function. There will be a gradual transition from discovery to
invention, a trend that is already well advanced in many laboratories. Two recent examples of the
inventive use of structural knowledge are the construction of novel a-hemolysin (a-HL) nano-
pores and the coupling of ion channels to receptors. Due to its simplicity and ability to tolerate
mutations, a-HL has become a prototype for biotechnological engineering in which the pore is
reconﬁgured to become a sensor (Gu et al. 1999 ; Maglia et al. 2008 ; Stoddart et al. 2009). This
includes the ability to distinguish the passage of the diﬀerent nucleotides in DNA, which in
future might make it possible to speed up the sequencing of whole genomes (Stoddart et al.
2009). In another novel experiment, two diﬀerent G-protein-coupled receptors have been fused
to an ion channel and shown to produce increases or decreases in membrane current on addition
of the receptor agonist (Moreau et al. 2008).
    Finally, there are bound to be unanticipated surprises. History is littered with statements that
imply everything will soon be known. Vannevar Bush’s analysis of science as an endless frontier
is just as true for membrane protein structure as it is in every other area (Bush, 1945).


14. Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Declan Doyle, Bob Gennis, Werner Kuehlbrandt, Edmund Kunji,
Andrew Leslie, Greg McMullan, Fiona Marshall, Jim Naismith, Chris Tate, Nigel Unwin and
Wolfram Welte for their valued suggestions and critical reading of manuscript. We also thank
Joanna Westmoreland for help with ﬁgures. Vinothkumar was a recipent of a Marie-Curie Intra-
European Fellowship (FP6) and an MRC career development fellowship.
144     K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

15. References
ABRAMSON, J., SMIRNOVA, I., KASHO, V., VERNER, G.,               ANDERLUH, G. & LAKEY, J. H. (2008). Disparate proteins
  KABACK, H. R. & IWATA, S. (2003). Structure and                  use similar architectures to damage membranes. Trends
  mechanism of the lactose permease of Escherichia coli.           in Biochemical Sciences 33(10), 482–490.
  Science 301(5633), 610–615.                                    ANDRADE, S. L., DICKMANNS, A., FICNER, R. & EINSLE, O.
ABRAMSON, J. & WRIGHT, E. M. (2009). Structure and                 (2005). Crystal structure of the archaeal ammonium
  function of Na(+)-symporters with inverted repeats.              transporter Amt-1 from Archaeoglobus fulgidus. Proceedings
  Current Opinion in Structural Biology 19(4), 425–432.            of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
ACCARDI, A. & MILLER, C. (2004). Secondary active trans-           America 102(42), 14994–14999.
  port mediated by a prokaryotic homologue of ClC                ANISHKIN, A., CHIANG, C. S. & SUKHAREV, S. (2005). Gain-
  Cl- channels. Nature 427(6977), 803–807.                         of-function mutations reveal expanded intermediate
AGO, H., KANAOKA, Y., IRIKURA, D., LAM, B. K.,                     states and a sequential action of two gates in MscL.
  SHIMAMURA, T., AAUSTEN, K. F. & MIYANO, M. (2007).               Journal of General Physiology 125(2), 155–170.
  Crystal structure of a human membrane protein in-              ANISHKIN, A. & SUKHAREV, S. (2004). Water dynamics and
  volved in cysteinyl leukotriene biosynthesis. Nature             dewetting transitions in the small mechanosensitive
  448(7153), 609–612.                                              channel MscS. Biophysical Journal 86(5), 2883–2895.
AGRE, P. (2004). Aquaporin water channels (Nobel Lec-            ANISHKIN, A. & SUKHAREV, S. (2009). State-stabilizing in-
  ture). Angewandte Chemie (International ed. in English)          teractions in bacterial mechanosensitive channel gating
  43(33), 4278–4290.                                               and adaptation. Journal of Biological Chemistry 284(29),
AHUJA, S., CROCKER, E., EILERS, M., HORNAK, V.,                    19153–19157.
  HIRSHFELD, A., ZILIOX, M., SYRETT, N., REEVES, P. J.,          AOYAMA, H., MURAMOTO, K., SHINZAWA-ITOH, K., HIRATA,
  KHORANA, H. G., SHEVES, M. & SMITH, S. O. (2009).                K., YAMASHITA, E., TSUKIHARA, T., OGURA, T. &
  Location of the retinal chromophore in the activated             YOSHIKAWA, S. (2009). A peroxide bridge between Fe
  state of rhodopsin. Journal of Biological Chemistry 284(15),     and Cu ions in the O2 reduction site of fully oxidized
  10190–10201.                                                     cytochrome c oxidase could suppress the proton pump.
AKITAKE, B., ANISHKIN, A., LIU, N. & SUKHAREV, S. (2007).          Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
  Straightening and sequential buckling of the pore-lining         States of America 106(7), 2165–2169.
  helices deﬁne the gating cycle of MscS. Nature Structural      APPEL, M., HIZLAN, D., VINOTHKUMAR, K. R., ZIEGLER, C.
  & Molecular Biology 14(12), 1141–1149.                           & KUHLBRANDT, W. (2009). Conformations of NhaA,
AKITAKE, B., ANISHKIN, A. & SUKHAREV, S. (2005). The               the Na/H exchanger from Escherichia coli, in the
  ‘‘ dashpot’’ mechanism of stretch-dependent gating in            pH-activated and ion-translocating states. Journal of Mol-
  MscS. Journal of General Physiology 125(2), 143–154.             ecular Biology 386(2), 351–365.
ALBA, B. M., LEEDS, J. A., ONUFRYK, C., LU, C. Z. & GROSS,       ARCONDEGUY, T., JACK, R. & MERRICK, M. (2001). P(II)
  C. A. (2002). DegS and YaeL participate sequentially             signal transduction proteins, pivotal players in microbial
  in the cleavage of RseA to activate the sigma(E)-                nitrogen control. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews
  dependent extracytoplasmic stress response. Genes &              65(1), 80–105.
  Development 16(16), 2156–2168.                                 BALASUBRAMANIAN, R. & ROSENZWEIG, A. C. (2007). Struc-
ALBERS, R. W., FAHN, S. & KOVAL, G. J. (1963). The role of         tural and mechanistic insights into methane oxidation
  sodium ions in the activation of electrophorus electric          by particulate methane monooxygenase. Accounts of Che-
  organ adenosine triphosphatase. Proceedings of the               mical Research 40(7), 573–580.
  National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America   BARNARD, T. J., DAUTIN, N., LUKACIK, P., BERNSTEIN, H. D.
  50, 474–481.                                                     & BUCHANAN, S. K. (2007). Autotransporter structure
ALLER, S. G., YU, J., WARD, A., WENG, Y., CHITTABOINA, S.,         reveals intra-barrel cleavage followed by conformational
  ZHUO, R., HARRELL, P. M., TRINH, Y. T., ZHANG, Q.,               changes. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 14(12),
  URBATSCH, I. L. & CHANG, G. (2009). Structure of                 1214–1220.
  P-glycoprotein reveals a molecular basis for poly-             BASLE, A., RUMMEL, G., STORICI, P., ROSENBUSCH, J. P. &
  speciﬁc drug binding. Science 323(5922), 1718–1722.              SCHIRMER, T. (2006). Crystal structure of osmoporin
ALTENBACH, C., KUSNETZOW, A. K., ERNST, O. P.,                     OmpC from E. coli at 2.0 Å. Journal of Molecular Biology
  HOFMANN, K. P. & HUBBELL, W. L. (2008). High-resol-              362(5), 933–942.
  ution distance mapping in rhodopsin reveals the pattern        BASS, R. B., STROP, P., BARCLAY, M. & REES, D. C. (2002).
  of helix movement due to activation. Proceedings of the          Crystal structure of Escherichia coli MscS, a voltage-
  National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America     modulated and mechanosensitive channel. Science
  105(21), 7439–7444.                                              298(5598), 1582–1587.
AMUNTS, A., DRORY, O. & NELSON, N. (2007). The struc-            BAYRHUBER, M., MEINS, T., HABECK, M., BECKER, S.,
  ture of a plant photosystem I supercomplex at 3.4 Å             GILLER, K., VILLINGER, S., VONRHEIN, C., GRIESINGER,
  resolution. Nature 447(7140), 58–63.                             C., ZWECKSTETTER, M. & ZETH, K. (2008). Structure of
                                                                             Structures of membrane proteins              145

  the human voltage-dependent anion channel. Proceedings            binding to extracellular gate of a sodium-dependent as-
  of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of       partate transporter. Nature 445(7126), 387–393.
  America 105(40), 15370–15375.                                   BROSIG, A., NESPER, J., BOOS, W., WELTE, W. &
BEITZ, E., WU, B., HOLM, L. M., SCHULTZ, J. E. &                    DIEDERICHS, K. (2009). Crystal structure of a major
  ZEUTHEN, T. (2006). Point mutations in the aromatic/              outer membrane protein from Thermus thermophilus
  arginine region in aquaporin 1 allow passage of urea,             HB27. Journal of Molecular Biology 385(5), 1445–1455.
  glycerol, ammonia, and protons. Proceedings of the National     BROWN, M. S. & GOLDSTEIN, J. L. (1999). A proteolytic
  Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103(2),       pathway that controls the cholesterol content of mem-
  269–274.                                                          branes, cells, and blood. Proceedings of the National
BELRHALI, H., NOLLERT, P., ROYANT, A., MENZEL, C.,                  Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 96(20),
  ROSENBUSCH, J. P., LANDAU, E. M. & PEBAY-PEYROULA,                11041–11048.
  E. (1999). Protein, lipid and water organization in bac-        BRZEZINSKI, P. & GENNIS, R. B. (2008). Cytochrome c
  teriorhodopsin crystals: a molecular view of the purple           oxidase: exciting progress and remaining mysteries.
  membrane at 1.9 Å resolution. Structure 7(8), 909–917.           Journal of Bioenergetics and Biomembranes 40(5), 521–531.
BEN-SHEM, A., FASS, D. & BIBI, E. (2007). Structural basis        BUCHANAN, S. K. (1999). Beta-Barrel proteins from bac-
  for intramembrane proteolysis by rhomboid serine                  terial outer membranes: structure, function and refold-
  proteases. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of     ing. Current Opinion in Structural Biology 9(4), 455–461.
  the United States of America 104(2), 462–466.                   BUCHANAN, S. K., SMITH, B. S., VENKATRAMANI, L.,
BEN-SHEM, A., FROLOW, F. & NELSON, N. (2003). Crystal               XIA, D. N., ESSER, L., PALNITKAR, M., CHAKRABORTY, R.,
  structure of plant photosystem I. Nature 426(6967),               VAN DER HELM, D. & DEISENHOFER, J. (1999). Crystal
  630–635.                                                          structure of the outer membrane active transporter
BERRISFORD, J. M., THOMPSON, C. J. & SAZANOV, L. A.
                                                                    FepA from Escherichia coli. Nature Structural & Molecular
  (2008). Chemical and NADH-induced, ROS-depen-
                                                                    Biology 6(1), 56–63.
  dent, cross-linking between subunits of complex I from
                                                                  BUSH, V. (1945). Summary of the Report to the President
  Escherichia coli and Thermus thermophilus. Biochemistry
                                                                    on a Program for Postwar Scientiﬁc Research by
  47(39), 10262–10270.
                                                                    Vannevar Bush, Director of the Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Re-
BERTERO, M. G., ROTHERY, R. A., PALAK, M., HOU, C., LIM,
                                                                    search and Development. Science 102(2639), 79–81.
  D., BLASCO, F., WEINER, J. H. & STRYNADKA, N. C.
                                                                  CAFFREY, M. (2003). Membrane protein crystallization.
  (2003). Insights into the respiratory electron transfer
                                                                    Journal of Structural Biology 142(1), 108–132.
  pathway from the structure of nitrate reductase A.
                                                                  CARPENTER, E. P., BEIS, K., CAMERON, A. D. & IWATA, S.
  Nature Structural Biology 10(9), 681–687.
                                                                    (2008). Overcoming the challenges of membrane pro-
BIANCHI, L. & DRISCOLL, M. (2002). Protons at the gate:
                                                                    tein crystallography. Current Opinion in Structural Biology
  DEG/ENaC ion channels help us feel and remember.
                                                                    18(5), 581–586.
  Neuron 34(3), 337–340.
                                                                  CATTERALL, W. A. (2000). From ionic currents to molecu-
BIESZKE, J. A., SPUDICH, E. N., SCOTT, K. L., BORKOVICH,
  K. A. & SPUDICH, J. L. (1999). A eukaryotic protein,              lar mechanisms : the structure and function of voltage-
  NOP-1, binds retinal to form an archaeal rhodopsin-like           gated sodium channels. Neuron 26(1), 13–25.
  photochemically reactive pigment. Biochemistry 38(43),          CELIE, P. H., VAN ROSSUM-FIKKERT, S. E., VAN DIJK, W. J.,
  14138–14145.                                                      BREJC, K., SMIT, A. B. & SIXMA, T. K. (2004). Nicotine
BINDA, C., NEWTON-VINSON, P., HUBALEK, F.,                          and carbamylcholine binding to nicotinic acetylcholine
  EDMONDSON, D. E. & MATTEVI, A. (2002). Structure of               receptors as studied in AChBP crystal structures. Neuron
  human monoamine oxidase B, a drug target for the                  41(6), 907–914.
  treatment of neurological disorders. Nature Structural          CHALFIE, M. (1997). A molecular model for mechan-
  Biology 9(1), 22–26.                                              osensation in Caenorhabditis elegans. Biol Bull 192(1), 125.
BINGLE, L. E., BAILEY, C. M. & PALLEN, M. J. (2008). Type         CHANG, G., SPENCER, R. H., LEE, A. T., BARCLAY, M. T. &
  VI secretion: a beginner’s guide. Current Opinion in              REES, D. C. (1998). Structure of the MscL homolog
  Microbiology 11(1), 3–8.                                          from Mycobacterium tuberculosis: a gated mechanosensitive
BISGAARD, H. (2001). Leukotriene modiﬁers in pediatric              ion channel. Science 282(5397), 2220–2226.
  asthma management. Pediatrics 107(2), 381–390.                  CHEN, I., CHRISTIE, P. J. & DUBNAU, D. (2005). The ins and
BOCQUET, N., NURY, H., BAADEN, M., LE POUPON, C.,                   outs of DNA transfer in bacteria. Science 310(5753),
  CHANGEUX, J. P., DELARUE, M. & CORRINGER, P. J.                   1456–1460.
  (2009). X-ray structure of a pentameric ligand-gated ion        CHEN, Y. J., PORNILLOS, O., LIEU, S., MA, C., CHEN, A. P. &
  channel in an apparently open conformation. Nature                CHANG, G. (2007). X-ray structure of EmrE supports
  457(7225), 111–114.                                               dual topology model. Proceedings of the National Academy of
BOUDKER, O., RYAN, R. M., YERNOOL, D., SHIMAMOTO, K.                Sciences of the United States of America 104(48),
  & GOUAUX, E. (2007). Coupling substrate and ion                   18999–19004.
146     K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

CHEREZOV, V., ROSENBAUM, D. M., HANSON, M. A.,                    DEISENHOFER, J., EPP, O., SINNING, I. & MICHEL, H. (1995).
  RASMUSSEN, S. G., THIAN, F. S., KOBILKA, T. S., CHOI,             Crystallographic reﬁnement at 2.3 Å resolution and re-
  H. J., KUHN, P., WEIS, W. I., KOBILKA, B. K. & STEVENS,           ﬁned model of the photosynthetic reaction centre from
  R. C. (2007). High-resolution crystal structure of an             Rhodopseudomonas viridis. Journal of Molecular Biology 246(3),
  engineered human beta2-adrenergic G protein-coupled               429–457.
  receptor. Science 318(5854), 1258–1265.                         DICKSON, V. K., SILVESTER, J. A., FEARNLEY, I. M., LESLIE,
CHIMENTO, D. P., MOHANTY, A. K., KADNER, R. J. &                    A. G. & WALKER, J. E. (2006). On the structure of the
  WIENER, M. C. (2003). Substrate-induced transmem-                 stator of the mitochondrial ATP synthase. EMBO
  brane signaling in the cobalamin transporter BtuB.                Journal 25(12), 2911–2918.
  Nature Structural Biology 10(5), 394–401.                       DONG, C., BEIS, K., NESPER, J., BRUNKAN-LAMONTAGNE,
CLANTIN, B., DELATTRE, A. S., RUCKTOOA, P., SAINT, N.,              A. L., CLARKE, B. R., WHITFIELD, C. & NAISMITH, J. H.
  MELI, A. C., LOCHT, C., JACOB-DUBUISSON, F. &                     (2006). Wza the translocon for E. coli capsular poly-
  VILLERET, V. (2007). Structure of the membrane protein            saccharides deﬁnes a new class of membrane protein.
  FhaC: a member of the Omp85-TpsB transporter su-                  Nature 444(7116), 226–229.
  perfamily. Science 317(5840), 957–961.                          DOYLE, D. A., MORAIS CABRAL, J., PFUETZNER, R. A., KUO,
CLAYTON, G. M., ALTIERI, S., HEGINBOTHAM, L., UNGER,                A., GULBIS, J. M., COHEN, S. L., CHAIT, B. T. &
  V. M. & MORAIS-CABRAL, J. H. (2008). Structure of the             MACKINNON, R. (1998). The structure of the potassium
  transmembrane regions of a bacterial cyclic nucleotide-           channel: molecular basis of K+ conduction and selec-
  regulated channel. Proceedings of the National Academy of         tivity. Science 280(5360), 69–77.
  Sciences of the United States of America 105(5), 1511–1515.     DRORY, O. & NELSON, N. (2006). The emerging structure
CONROY, M. J., DURAND, A., LUPO, D., LI, X. D.,                     of vacuolar ATPases. Physiology (Bethesda) 21, 317–325.
                                                                  DUTZLER, R., CAMPBELL, E. B., CADENE, M., CHAIT, B. T. &
  BULLOUGH, P. A., WINKLER, F. K. & MERRICK, M.
                                                                    MACKINNON, R. (2002). X-ray structure of a ClC chlor-
  (2007). The crystal structure of the Escherichia coli AmtB-
                                                                    ide channel at 3.0 Å reveals the molecular basis of anion
  GlnK complex reveals how GlnK regulates the am-
                                                                    selectivity. Nature 415(6869), 287–294.
  monia channel. Proceedings of the National Academy of
                                                                  ENGEL, A. & STAHLBERG, H. (2002). Aquaglyceroporins:
  Sciences of the United States of America 104(4), 1213–1218.
                                                                    channel proteins with a conserved core, multiple func-
COWAN, S. W., SCHIRMER, T., RUMMEL, G., STEIERT, M.,
                                                                    tions, and variable surfaces. International Review of Cytology
  GHOSH, R., PAUPTIT, R. A., JANSONIUS, J. N. &
                                                                    215, 75–104.
  ROSENBUSCH, J. P. (1992). Crystal structures explain
                                                                  ENGELMAN, D. M., CHEN, Y., CHIN, C. N., CURRAN, A. R.,
  functional properties of two E. coli porins. Nature
                                                                    DIXON, A. M., DUPUY, A. D., LEE, A. S., LEHNERT, U.,
  358(6389), 727–733.
                                                                    MATTHEWS, E. E., RESHETNYAK, Y. K., SENES, A. &
DANIELLI, J. F. & DAVSON, H. (1935). A contribution to the
                                                                    POPOT, J. L. (2003). Membrane protein folding: beyond
  theory of permeability of thin ﬁlms. Journal of Cellular and
                                                                    the two stage model. FEBS Letters 555(1), 122–125.
  Compartive Physiology 5(4), 495–508.
                                                                  ENGELMAN, D. M. & STEITZ, T. A. (1981). The spon-
DAVIDSON, A. L. & MALONEY, P. C. (2007). ABC trans-                 taneous insertion of proteins into and across mem-
  porters: how small machines do a big job. Trends in               branes: the helical hairpin hypothesis. Cell 23(2),
  Microbiology 15(10), 448–455.                                     411–422.
DAVIDSON, A. L., SHUMAN, H. A. & NIKAIDO, H. (1992).              ESHAGHI, S., NIEGOWSKI, D., KOHL, A., MARTINEZ MOLINA,
  Mechanism of maltose transport in Escherichia coli:               D., LESLEY, S. A. & NORDLUND, P. (2006). Crystal
  transmembrane signaling by periplasmic binding pro-               structure of a divalent metal ion transporter CorA at 2.9
  teins. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the     angstrom resolution. Science 313(5785), 354–357.
  United States of America 89(6), 2360–2364.                      ESSER, L., GONG, X., YANG, S., YU, L., YU, C. A. & XIA, D.
DAWSON, R. J. & LOCHER, K. P. (2006). Structure of a                (2006). Surface-modulated motion switch: capture and
  bacterial multidrug ABC transporter. Nature 443(7108),            release of iron-sulfur protein in the cytochrome bc1
  180–185.                                                          complex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
DE GROOT, B. L. & GRUBMULLER, H. (2001). Water per-                 United States of America 103(35), 13045–13050.
  meation across biological membranes: mechanism and              FAHAM, S. & BOWIE, J. U. (2002). Bicelle crystallization : a
  dynamics of aquaporin-1 and GlpF. Science 294(5550),              new method for crystallizing membrane proteins yields
  2353–2357.                                                        a monomeric bacteriorhodopsin structure. Journal of
DE GROTTHUSS, C. J. T. (1806). Annali di Chimica LVIII,             Molecular Biology 316(1), 1–6.
  54.                                                             FAHAM, S., WATANABE, A., BESSERER, G. M., CASCIO, D.,
DEISENHOFER, J., EPP, O., MIKI, K., HUBER, R. & MICHEL,             SPECHT, A., HIRAYAMA, B. A., WRIGHT, E. M. &
  H. (1985). Structure of the protein subunits in the               ABRAMSON, J. (2008). The crystal structure of a sodium
  photosynthetic reaction center of Rhodopseudomonas                galactose transporter reveals mechanistic insights into
  viridis at 3Å resolution. Nature 318, 618–624.                   Na+/sugar symport. Science 321(5890), 810–814.
                                                                           Structures of membrane proteins                  147

FALLER, M., NIEDERWEIS, M. & SCHULZ, G. E. (2004). The           (2008). An intermediate step in the evolution of
   structure of a mycobacterial outer-membrane channel.          ATPases: a hybrid F(0)-V(0) rotor in a bacterial Na(+)
   Science 303(5661), 1189–1192.                                 F(1)F(0) ATP synthase. FEBS Journal 275(9),
FANG, Y., JAYARAM, H., SHANE, T., KOLMAKOVA-                     1999–2007.
   PARTENSKY, L., WU, F., WILLIAMS, C., XIONG, Y. &            FU, D., LIBSON, A., MIERCKE, L. J., WEITZMAN, C.,
   MILLER, C. (2009). Structure of a prokaryotic virtual         NOLLERT, P., KRUCINSKI, J. & STROUD, R. M. (2000).
   proton pump at 3.2 Å resolution. Nature 460(7258),           Structure of a glycerol-conducting channel and the basis
   1040–1043.                                                    for its selectivity. Science 290(5491), 481–486.
FENG, L., YAN, H., WU, Z., YAN, N., WANG, Z., JEFFREY,         GADSBY, D. C., TAKEUCHI, A., ARTIGAS, P. & REYES, N.
   P. D. & SHI, Y. (2007). Structure of a site-2 prote-          (2009). Review. Peering into an ATPase ion pump with
   ase family intramembrane metalloprotease. Science             single-channel recordings. Philosophical Transactions of the
   318(5856), 1608–1612.                                         Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences 364(1514),
FERGUSON, A. D., CHAKRABORTY, R., SMITH, B. S., ESSER,           229–238.
   L., VAN DER HELM, D. & DEISENHOFER, J. (2002).              GAO, X., LU, F., ZHOU, L., DANG, S., SUN, L., LI, X., WANG,
   Structural basis of gating by the outer membrane              J. & SHI, Y. (2009). Structure and mechanism of an
   transporter FecA. Science 295(5560), 1715–1719.               amino acid antiporter. Science 324(5934), 1565–1568.
FERGUSON, A. D., HOFMANN, E., COULTON, J. W.,                  GATSOS, X., PERRY, A. J., ANWARI, K., DOLEZAL, P.,
   DIEDERICHS, K. & WELTE, W. (1998). Siderophore-               WOLYNEC, P. P., LIKIC, V. A., PURCELL, A. W.,
   mediated iron transport: crystal structure of FhuA with       BUCHANAN, S. K. & LITHGOW, T. (2008). Protein se-
   bound lipopolysaccharide. Science 282(5397), 2215–2220.       cretion and outer membrane assembly in
FERGUSON, A. D., MCKEEVER, B. M., XU, S., WISNIEWSKI,            Alphaproteobacteria. FEMS Microbiology Review 32(6),
   D., MILLER, D. K., YAMIN, T. T., SPENCER, R. H., CHU,
                                                                 995–1009.
   L., UJJAINWALLA, F., CUNNIGHHAM, B. R., EVANS, J. F. &
                                                               GAUTIER, A., KIRKPATRICK, J. P. & NIETLISPACH, D. (2008).
   BECKER, J. W. (2007). Crystal structure of inhibitor-
                                                                 Solution-state NMR spectroscopy of a seven-helix
   bound human 5-lipoxygenase-activating protein. Science
                                                                 transmembrane protein receptor: backbone assignment,
   317(5837), 510–512.
                                                                 secondary structure, and dynamics. Angew Chem Int Ed
FERREIRA, K. N., IVERSON, T. M., MAGHLAOUI, K., BARBER,
                                                                 Engl 47(38), 7297–7300.
   J. & IWATA, S. (2004). Architecture of the photo-
                                                               GERBER, S., COMELLAS-BIGLER, M., GOETZ, B. A. &
   synthetic oxygen-evolving center. Science 303(5665),
                                                                 LOCHER, K. P. (2008). Structural basis of trans-inhi-
   1831–1838.
                                                                 bition in a molybdate/tungstate ABC transporter. Science
FISCHER, G., KOSINSKA-ERIKSSON, U., APONTE-SANTAMARIA,
                                                                 321(5886), 246–250.
   C., PALMGREN, M., GEIJER, C., HEDFALK, K., HOHMANN,
                                                               GILLESPIE, P. G. & WALKER, R. G. (2001). Molecular basis
   S., DE GROOT, B. L., NEUTZE, R. & LINDKVIST-
                                                                 of mechanosensory transduction. Nature 413(6852),
   PETERSSON, K. (2009). Crystal structure of a yeast
                                                                 194–202.
   aquaporin at 1.15 angstrom reveals a novel gating
   mechanism. PLoS Biology 7(6), e1000130.                     GIRVIN, M. E., RASTOGI, V. K., ABILDGAARD, F., MARKLEY,
FISCHER, W. B. & SANSOM, M. S. (2002). Viral ion channels:       J. L. & FILLINGAME, R. H. (1998). Solution structure of
   structure and function. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta         the transmembrane H+-transporting subunit c of the
   1561(1), 27–45.                                               F1F0 ATP synthase. Biochemistry 37(25), 8817–8824.
FLEISHMAN, S. J., HARRINGTON, S. E., ENOSH, A., HALPERIN,      GONEN, T., CHENG, Y., KISTLER, J. & WALZ, T. (2004a).
   D., TATE, C. G. & BEN-TAL, N. (2006). Quasi-symmetry          Aquaporin-0 membrane junctions form upon proteo-
   in the cryo-EM structure of EmrE provides the key to          lytic cleavage. Journal of Molecular Biology 342(4),
   modeling its transmembrane domain. Journal of Molecular       1337–1345.
   Biology 364(1), 54–67.                                      GONEN, T., SLIZ, P., KISTLER, J., CHENG, Y. & WALZ, T.
FLEISHMAN, S. J., UNGER, V. M., YEAGER, M. & BEN-TAL,            (2004b). Aquaporin-0 membrane junctions reveal the
   N. (2004). A Calpha model for the transmembrane               structure of a closed water pore. Nature 429(6988),
   alpha helices of gap junction intercellular channels.         193–197.
   Molecules and Cells 15(6), 879–888.                         GONEN, T. & WALZ, T. (2006). The structure of aqua-
FORST, D., WELTE, W., WACKER, T. & DIEDERICHS, K.                porins. Quarterly Reviews of Biophysics 39(4), 361–396.
   (1998). Structure of the sucrose-speciﬁc porin ScrY         GONZALES, E. B., KAWATE, T. & GOUAUX, E. (2009). Pore
   from Salmonella typhimurium and its complex with              architecture and ion sites in acid-sensing ion channels
   sucrose. Nature Structural Biology 5(1), 37–46.               and P2X receptors. Nature 460(7255), 599–604.
FREEMAN, M. (2008). Rhomboid proteases and their bio-          GORDELIY, V. I., LABAHN, J., MOUKHAMETZIANOV, R.,
   logical functions. Annual Review of Genetics 42, 191–210.     EFREMOV, R., GRANZIN, J., SCHLESINGER, R., BULDT, G.,
FRITZ, M., KLYSZEJKO, A. L., MORGNER, N., VONCK, J.,             SAVOPOL, T., SCHEIDIG, A. J., KLARE, J. P. &
   BRUTSCHY, B., MULLER, D. J., MEIER, T. & MULLER, V.           ENGELHARD, M. (2002). Molecular basis of
148      K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

  transmembrane signalling by sensory rhodopsin II-                 HENDERSON, R. (1975). The structure of the purple mem-
  transducer complex. Nature 419(6906), 484–487.                      brane from Halobacterium halobium: analysis of the X-ray
GOUAUX, E. (1998). Alpha-Hemolysin from Staphylococcus                diﬀraction pattern. Journal of Molecular Biology 93(2),
  aureus: an archetype of beta-barrel, channel-forming                123–138.
  toxins. Journal of Structural Biology 121(2), 110–122.            HENDERSON, R. (1981). Membrane protein structure. In
GRIGORIEFF, N. (1998). Three-dimensional structure of                 Membranes and Intercellular Communication (eds. R. Balian,
  bovine NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I)                   M. Chabre and P. Devaux), pp. 232–249. North-
  at 22 Å in ice. Journal of Molecular Biology 277(5),               Holland Publishing Company.
  1033–1046.                                                        HENDERSON, R. (2004). Realizing the potential of electron
GRUBER, G. & MARSHANSKY, V. (2008). New insights into                 cryo-microscopy. Quarterly Reviews of Biophysics 37(1),
  structure-function relationships between archeal ATP                3–13.
  synthase (A1A0) and vacuolar type ATPase (V1V0).                  HENDERSON, R., BALDWIN, J. M., CESKA, T. A., ZEMLIN, F.,
  Bioessays 30(11–12), 1096–1109.                                     BECKMANN, E. & DOWNING, K. H. (1990). Model for the
GRUSWITZ, F., O’CONNELL, J., 3RD & STROUD, R. M.                      structure of bacteriorhodopsin based on high-resolution
  (2007). Inhibitory complex of the transmembrane am-                 electron cryo-microscopy. Journal of Molecular Biology
  monia channel, AmtB, and the cytosolic regulatory                   213(4), 899–929.
  protein, GlnK, at 1.96 Å. Proceedings of the National            HENDERSON, R. & UNWIN, P. N. (1975). Three-dimensional
  Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 104(1),         model of purple membrane obtained by electron mi-
  42–47.                                                              croscopy. Nature 257(5521), 28–32.
GU, L. Q., BRAHA, O., CONLAN, S., CHELEY, S. & BAYLEY,              HILF, R. J. & DUTZLER, R. (2008). X-ray structure of a
  H. (1999). Stochastic sensing of organic analytes by a              prokaryotic pentameric ligand-gated ion channel. Nature
                                                                      452(7185), 375–379.
  pore-forming protein containing a molecular adapter.
                                                                    HILF, R. J. & DUTZLER, R. (2009). Structure of a potentially
  Nature 398(6729), 686–690.
                                                                      open state of a proton-activated pentameric ligand-
GUAN, L., MIRZA, O., VERNER, G., IWATA, S. & KABACK,
                                                                      gated ion channel. Nature 457(7225), 115–118.
  H. R. (2007). Structural determination of wild-type lac-
                                                                    HILLER, S., GARCES, R. G., MALIA, T. J., OREKHOV, V. Y.,
  tose permease. Proceedings of the National Academy of
                                                                      COLOMBINI, M. & WAGNER, G. (2008). Solution struc-
  Sciences of the United States of America 104(39),
                                                                      ture of the integral human membrane protein VDAC-1
  15294–15298.
                                                                      in detergent micelles. Science 321(5893), 1206–1210.
GUENEBAUT, V., SCHLITT, A., WEISS, H., LEONARD, K. &
                                                                    HIRAI, T., HEYMANN, J. A., SHI, D., SARKER, R., MALONEY,
  FRIEDRICH, T. (1998). Consistent structure between
                                                                      P. C. & SUBRAMANIAM, S. (2002). Three-dimensional
  bacterial and mitochondrial NADH:ubiquinone oxi-
                                                                      structure of a bacterial oxalate transporter. Nature
  doreductase (complex I). Journal of Molecular Biology
                                                                      Structural Biology 9(8), 597–600.
  276(1), 105–112.
                                                                    HIROAKI, Y., TANI, K., KAMEGAWA, A., GYOBU, N.,
HAKEMIAN, A. S. & ROSENZWEIG, A. C. (2007). The bio-
                                                                      NISHIKAWA, K., SUZUKI, H., WALZ, T., SASAKI, S.,
  chemistry of methane oxidation. Annual Review of Bio-               MITSUOKA, K., KIMURA, K., MIZOGUCHI, A. & FUJIYOSHI,
  chemistry 76, 223–241.                                              Y. (2006). Implications of the aquaporin-4 structure on
HARRIES, W. E., AKHAVAN, D., MIERCKE, L. J., KHADEMI, S.              array formation and cell adhesion. Journal of Molecular
  & STORUD, R. M. (2004). The channel architecture of                 Biology 355(4), 628–639.
  aquaporin 0 at a 2.2-A resolution. Proceedings of the             HOCHULI, E., BANNWARTH, W., DOBELI, H., GENTZ, R. &
  National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America        STUBER, D. (1988). Genetic approach to facilitate puri-
  101(39), 14045–14050.                                               ﬁcation of recombinant proteins with a novel metal
HARRIS, A. L. (2001). Emerging issues of connexin chan-               chelate adsorbent Bio-technology 6, 1321–1325.
  nels : biophysics ﬁlls the gap. Quarterly Reviews of Biophysics   HOLLENSTEIN, K., FREI, D. C. & LOCHER, K. P. (2007).
  34(3), 325–472.                                                     Structure of an ABC transporter in complex with its
HATTORI, M., TANAKA, Y., FUKAI, S., ISHITANI, R. &                    binding protein. Nature 446(7132), 213–216.
  NUREKI, O. (2007). Crystal structure of the MgtE                  HOLM, P. J., BHAKAT, P., JEGERSCHOLD, C., GYOBU, N.,
  Mg2+ transporter. Nature 448(7157), 1072–1075.                      MITSUOKA, K., FUJIYOSHI, Y., MORGENSTERN, R. &
HEGINBOTHAM, L., LEMASURIER, M., KOLMAKOVA-                           HEBERT, H. (2006). Structural basis for detoxiﬁcation
  PARTENSKY, L. & MILLER, C. (1999). Single Streptomyces              and oxidative stress protection in membranes. Journal of
  lividans K(+) channels: functional asymmetries and                  Molecular Biology 360(5), 934–945.
  sidedness of proton activation. Journal of General                HORSEFIELD, R., NORDEN, K., FELLERT, M., BACKMARK, A.,
  Physiology 114(4), 551–560.                                         TORNROTH-HORSEFIELD,           S.,   TERWISSCHA      VAN
HEITZMANN, H. (1972). Rhodopsin is the predominant                    SCHELTINGA, A. C., KVASSMAN, J., KJELLBOM, P.,
  protein of rod outer segment membranes. Nat New Biol                JOHANSON, U. & NEUTZE, R. (2008). High-resolution
  235(56), 114.                                                       x-ray structure of human aquaporin 5. Proceedings of the
                                                                              Structures of membrane proteins                  149

   National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America   JARDETZKY, O. (1966). Simple allosteric model for mem-
   105(36), 13327–13332.                                             brane pumps. Nature 211(5052), 969–970.
HUANG, Y., LEMIEUX, M. J., SONG, J., AUER, M. & WANG,             JASTI, J., FURUKAWA, H., GONZALES, E. B. & GOUAUX, E.
   D. N. (2003). Structure and mechanism of the glycerol-            (2007). Structure of acid-sensing ion channel 1 at 1.9 Å
   3-phosphate transporter from Escherichia coli. Science            resolution and low pH. Nature 449(7160), 316–323.
   301(5633), 616–620.                                            JAVELLE, A., LUPO, D., ZHENG, L., LI, X. D., WINKLER,
HUNTE, C., KOEPKE, J., LANGE, C., ROSSMANITH, T. &                   F. K. & MERRICK, M. (2006). An unusual twin-his ar-
   MICHEL, H. (2000). Structure at 2.3 Å resolution of the          rangement in the pore of ammonia channels is essential
   cytochrome bc(1) complex from the yeast Saccharomyces             for substrate conductance. Journal of Biological Chemistry
   cerevisiae co-crystallized with an antibody Fv fragment.          281(51), 39492–39498.
   Structure 8(6), 669–684.                                       JEFFERIES, K. C., CIPRIANO, D. J. & FORGAC, M. (2008).
HUNTE, C., SCREPANTI, E., VENTURI, M., RIMON, A., PADAN,             Function, structure and regulation of the vacuolar (H+)-
   E. & MICHEL, H. (2005). Structure of a Na+/H+ anti-               ATPases. Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 476(1),
   porter and insights into mechanism of action and regu-            33–42.
   lation by pH. Nature 435(7046), 1197–1202.                     JEGERSCHOLD, C., PAWELZIK, S. C., PURHONEN, P., BHAKAT,
HVORUP, R. N., GOETZ, B. A., NIEDERER, M.,                           P., GHEORGHE, K. R., GYOBU, N., MITSUOKA, K.,
   HOLLENSTEIN, K., PEROZO, E. & LOCHER, K. P. (2007).               MORGENSTERN, R., JAKOBSSON, P. J. & HEBERT, H.
   Asymmetry in the structure of the ABC transporter-                (2008). Structural basis for induced formation of the
   binding protein complex BtuCD-BtuF. Science                       inﬂammatory mediator prostaglandin E2. Proceedings of
   317(5843), 1387–1390.                                             the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
IACOVACHE, I., VAN DER GOOT, F. G. & PERNOT, L. (2008).              105(32), 11110–11115.
                                                                  JIANG, Y., LEE, A., CHEN, J., CADENE, M., CHAIT, B. T. &
   Pore formation: an ancient yet complex form of attack.
                                                                     MACKINNON, R. (2002). Crystal structure and mechan-
   Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1778(7–8), 1611–1623.
                                                                     ism of a calcium-gated potassium channel. Nature
IGNOUL, S. & EGGERMONT, J. (2005). CBS domains: struc-
                                                                     417(6888), 515–522.
   ture, function, and pathology in human proteins.
                                                                  JIANG, Y., LEE, A., CHEN, J., RUTA, V., CADENE, M., CHAIT,
   American Journal of Physiology. Cell Physiology 289(6),
                                                                     B. T. & MACKINNON, R. (2003a). X-ray structure of
   C1369–C1378.
                                                                     a voltage-dependent K+ channel. Nature 423(6935),
INABA, K. & ITO, K. (2008). Structure and mechanisms of
                                                                     33–41.
   the DsbB-DsbA disulﬁde bond generation machine.
                                                                  JIANG, Y., RUTA, V., CHEN, J., LEE, A. & MACKINNON, R.
   Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1783(4), 520–529.
                                                                     (2003b). The principle of gating charge movement
INABA, K., MURAKAMI, S., NAKAGAWA, A., IIDA, H., KINJO,
                                                                     in a voltage-dependent K+ channel. Nature 423(6935),
   M., ITO, K. & SUZUKI, M. (2009). Dynamic nature of
                                                                     42–48.
   disulphide bond formation catalysts revealed by crystal
                                                                  JORDAN, P., FROMME, P., WITT, H. T., KLUKAS, O.,
   structures of DsbB. EMBO Journal 28(6), 779–791.
                                                                     SAENGER, W. & KRAUSS, N. (2001). Three-dimensional
INABA, K., MURAKAMI, S., SUZUKI, M., NAKAGAWA, A.,                   structure of cyanobacterial photosystem I at 2.5 Å res-
   YAMASHITA, E., OKADA, K. & ITO, K. (2006). Crystal                olution. Nature 411(6840), 909–917.
   structure of the DsbB-DsbA complex reveals a mech-             JORMAKKA, M., BYRNE, B. & IWATA, S. (2003). Proto-
   anism of disulﬁde bond generation. Cell 127(4),                   nmotive force generation by a redox loop mechanism.
   789–801.                                                          FEBS Letters 545(1), 25–30.
ISHITANI, R., SUGITA, Y., DOHMAE, N., FURUYA, N.,                 JORMAKKA, M., TORNROTH, S., BYRNE, B. & IWATA, S.
   HATTORI, M. & NUREKI, O. (2008). Mg2+sensing                      (2002). Molecular basis of proton motive force gener-
   mechanism of Mg2+ transporter MgtE probed by                      ation: structure of formate dehydrogenase-N. Science
   molecular dynamics study. Proceedings of the National             295(5561), 1863–1868.
   Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 105(40),   JORMAKKA, M., YOKOYAMA, K., YANO, T., TAMAKOSHI, M.,
   15393–15398.                                                      AKIMOTO, S., SHIMAMURA, T., CURMI, P. & IWATA, S.
IWATA, S., LEE, J. W., OKADA, K., LEE, J. K., IWATA, M.,             (2008). Molecular mechanism of energy conservation in
   RASMUSSEN, B., LINK, T. A., RAMASWAMY, S. & JAP, B. K.            polysulﬁde respiration. Nature Structural & Molecular
   (1998). Complete structure of the 11-subunit bovine               Biology 15(7), 730–737.
   mitochondrial cytochrome bc1 complex. Science                  JUNG, J. S., PRESTON, G. M., SMITH, B. L., GUGGINO, W. B.
   281(5373), 64–71.                                                 & AGRE, P. (1994). Molecular structure of the water
JAAKOLA, V. P., GRIFFITH, M. T., HANSON, M. A.,                      channel through aquaporin CHIP. The hourglass
   CHEREZOV, V., CHIEN, E. Y., LANE, J. R., IJZERMAN, A. P.          model. Journal of Biological Chemistry 269(20),
   & STEVENS, R. C. (2008). The 2.6 Ångstrom crystal                14648–14654.
   structure of a human A2a adenosine receptor bound to           JUNGE, F., SCHNEIDER, B., RECKEL, S., SCHWARZ, D.,
   an antagonist. Science 322(5905), 1211–1217.                      DOTSCH, V. & BERNHARD, F. (2008). Large-scale
150     K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

  production of functional membrane proteins. Cellular          KUHLBRANDT, W. (1988). Three-dimensional crystallization
  and Molecular Life Sciences 65(11), 1729–1755.                   of membrane proteins. Quarterly Reviews of Biophysics
KADABA, N. S., KAISER, J. T., JOHNSON, E., LEE, A. & REES,         21(4), 429–477.
  D. C. (2008). The high-aﬃnity E. coli methionine ABC          KUHLBRANDT, W. (1992). Two-dimensional crystallization
  transporter: structure and allosteric regulation. Science        of membrane proteins. Quarterly Reviews of Biophysics
  321(5886), 250–253.                                              25(1), 1–49.
KAWATE, T. & GOUAUX, E. (2006). Fluorescence-detection          KUHLBRANDT, W. (2004). Biology, structure and mechan-
  size-exclusion chromatography for precrystallization             ism of P-type ATPases. Nature Reviews. Molecular Cell
  screening of integral membrane proteins. Structure 14(4),        Biology 5(4), 282–295.
  673–681.                                                      KUHLBRANDT, W., WANG, D. N. & FUJIYOSHI, Y. (1994).
KAWATE, T., MICHEL, J. C., BIRDSONG, W. T. & GOUAUX, E.            Atomic model of plant light-harvesting complex by
  (2009). Crystal structure of the ATP-gated P2X(4) ion            electron crystallography. Nature 367(6464), 614–621.
  channel in the closed state. Nature 460(7255), 592–598.       KUNG, C. (2005). A possible unifying principle for me-
KEHRES, D. G. & MAGUIRE, M. E. (2002). Structure, pro-             chanosensation. Nature 436(7051), 647–654.
  perties and regulation of magnesium transport proteins.       KUO, A., GULBIS, J. M., ANTCLIFF, J. F., RAHMAN, T., LOWE,
  Biometals 15(3), 261–270.                                        E. D., ZIMMER, J., CUTHBERTSON, J., ASHCROFT, F. M.,
KHADEMI, S., O’CONNELL, J., III, REMIS, J., ROBLES-                EZAKI, T. & DOYLE, D. A. (2003). Crystal structure of
  COLMENARES, Y., MIERCKE, L. J. & STROUD, R. M.                   the potassium channel KirBac1.1 in the closed state.
  (2004). Mechanism of ammonia transport by Amt/                   Science 300(5627), 1922–1926.
  MEP/Rh: structure of AmtB at 1.35 Å. Science                 KURISU, G., ZHANG, H., SMITH, J. L. & CRAMER, W. A.
  305(5690), 1587–1594.                                            (2003). Structure of the cytochrome b6f complex of
KHADEMI, S. & STROUD, R. M. (2006). The Amt/MEP/Rh                 oxygenic photosynthesis: tuning the cavity. Science
  family: structure of AmtB and the mechanism of am-               302(5647), 1009–1014.
  monia gas conduction. Physiology (Bethesda) 21, 419–429.      LAEMMLI, U. K. (1970). Cleavage of structural proteins
KIM, A. C., OLIVER, D. C. & PAETZEL, M. (2008). Crystal            during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4.
  structure of a bacterial signal Peptide peptidase. Journal       Nature 227(5259), 680–685.
  of Molecular Biology 376(2), 352–366.                         LANCASTER, C. R., KROGER, A., AUER, M. & MICHEL, H.
KING, L. S., KOZONO, D. & AGRE, P. (2004). From struc-             (1999). Structure of fumarate reductase from Wolinella
  ture to disease: the evolving tale of aquaporin biology.         succinogenes at 2.2 Å resolution. Nature 402(6760),
  Nature Reviews. Molecular Cell Biology 5(9), 687–698.            377–385.
KLINGENBERG, M. (1981). Membrane protein oligomeric             LEE, J. K., KOZONO, D., REMIS, J., KITAGAWA, Y., AGRE, P.
  structure and transport function. Nature 290(5806),              & STROUD, R. M. (2005). Structural basis for conduc-
  449–454.                                                         tance by the archaeal aquaporin AqpM at 1.68 Å.
KLINGENBERG, M. (2008). The ADP and ATP transport in               Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
  mitochondria and its carrier. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta      States of America 102(52), 18932–18937.
  1778(10), 1978–2021.                                          LEMBERG, M. K., MENENDEZ, J., MISIK, A., GARCIA, M.,
KOGLIN, A. & WALSH, C. T. (2009). Structural insights into         KOTH, C. M. & FREEMAN, M. (2005). Mechanism of in-
  nonribosomal peptide enzymatic assembly lines. Natural           tramembrane proteolysis investigated with puriﬁed
  Product Reports 26(8), 987–1000.                                 rhomboid proteases. EMBO Journal 24(3), 464–472.
KORONAKIS, V., SHARFF, A., KORONAKIS, E., LUISI, B. &           LEMIEUX, M. J., FISCHER, S. J., CHERNEY, M. M., BATEMAN,
  HUGHES, C. (2000). Crystal structure of the bacterial            K. S. & JAMES, M. N. (2007). The crystal structure of the
  membrane protein TolC central to multidrug eﬄux and              rhomboid peptidase from Haemophilus inﬂuenzae pro-
  protein export. Nature 405(6789), 914–919.                       vides insight into intramembrane proteolysis. Proceedings
KOST, T. A., CONDREAY, J. P. & JARVIS, D. L. (2005).               of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
  Baculovirus as versatile vectors for protein expression          America 104(3), 750–754.
  in insect and mammalian cells. Nature Biotechnology 23(5),    LENARD, J. (1970). Protein and glycolipid components of
  567–575.                                                         human erythrocyte membranes. Biochemistry 9(5),
KRIEG, S., HUCHE, F., DIEDERICHS, K., IZADI-PRUNEYRE, N.,          1129–1132.
  LECROISEY, A., WANDERSMAN, C., DELEPELAIRE, P. &              LI, J., EDWARDS, P. C., BURGHAMMER, M., VILLA, C. &
  WELTE, W. (2009). Heme uptake across the outer                   SCHERTLER, G. F. (2004). Structure of bovine rhodopsin
  membrane as revealed by crystal structures of the re-            in a trigonal crystal form. Journal of Molecular Biology
  ceptor-hemophore complex. Proceedings of the National            343(5), 1409–1438.
  Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106(4),   LI, M., FARLEY, R. A. & LESTER, H. A. (2002). Voltage-
  1045–1050.                                                       dependent transient currents of human and rat 5-HT
KRISHTAL, O. (2003). The ASICs: signaling molecules?               transporters (SERT) are blocked by HEPES and ion
  Modulators? Trends in Neurosciences 26(9), 477–483.              channel ligands. FEBS Letters 513(2–3), 247–252.
                                                                                 Structures of membrane proteins               151

LIEBERMAN, R. L. & ROSENZWEIG, A. C. (2005). Crystal                    protein-coupled receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
  structure of a membrane-bound metalloenzyme that                      100(19), 10706–10711.
  catalyses the biological oxidation of methane. Nature               LUDEWIG, U. (2006). Ion transport versus gas conduction:
  434(7030), 177–182.                                                   function of AMT/Rh-type proteins. Transfusion Clinique
LIN, Y., CAO, Z. & MO, Y. (2006). Molecular dynamics                    et Biologique 13(1–2), 111–116.
  simulations on the Escherichia coli ammonia channel                 LUECKE, H., SCHOBERT, B., RICHTER, H. T., CARTAILLER,
  protein AmtB : mechanism of ammonia/ammonium                          J. P. & LANYI, J. K. (1999). Structure of bacter-
  transport. Journal of the American Chemical Society 128(33),          iorhodopsin at 1.55 Å resolution. Journal of Molecular
  10876–10884.                                                          Biology 291(4), 899–911.
LIU, Z., GANDHI, C. S. & REES, D. C. (2009). Structure of a           LUNIN, V. V., DOBROVETSKY, E., KHUTORESKAYA, G.,
  tetrameric MscL in an expanded intermediate state.                    ZHANG, R., JOACHIMIAK, A., DOYLE, D. A., BOCHKAREV,
  Nature 461(7260), 120–124.                                            A., MAGUIRE, M. E., EDWARDS, A. M. & KOTH, C. M.
LOCHER, K. P. (2008). Review. Structure and mechanism                   (2006). Crystal structure of the CorA Mg2+ transporter.
  of ATP-binding cassette transporters. Philosophical                   Nature 440(7085), 833–837.
  Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological   LUPO, D., LI, X. D., DURAND, A., TOMIZAKI, T., CHERIF-
  Sciences.                                                             ZAHAR, B., MATASSI, G., MERRICK, M. & WINKLER, F. K.
LOCHER, K. P., LEE, A. T. & REES, D. C. (2002). The E. coli             (2007). The 1.3-A resolution structure of Nitrosomonas
  BtuCD structure: a framework for ABC transporter                      europaea Rh50 and mechanistic implications for NH3
  architecture and mechanism. Science 296(5570),                        transport by Rhesus family proteins. Proceedings of the
  1091–1098.                                                            National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
LOCHER, K. P., REES, B., KOEBNIK, R., MITSCHLER, A.,                    104(49), 19303–19308.
  MOULINIER, L., ROSENBUSCH, J. P. & MORAS, D. (1998).                MACKENZIE, K. R., PRESTEGARD, J. H. & ENGELMAN, D. M.
  Transmembrane signaling across the ligand-gated FhuA                  (1997). A transmembrane helix dimer: structure and
  receptor: crystal structures of free and ferrichrome-                 implications. Science 276(5309), 131–133.
  bound states reveal allosteric changes. Cell 95(6),                 MACKINNON, R. (2004a). Nobel Lecture. Potassium chan-
  771–778.                                                              nels and the atomic basis of selective ion conduction.
LOLKEMA, J. S. & SLOTBOOM, D. J. (2003). Classiﬁcation of               Bioscience Reports 24(2), 75–100.
  29 families of secondary transport proteins into a single           MACKINNON, R. (2004b). Potassium channels and the
  structural class using hydropathy proﬁle analysis. Journal            atomic basis of selective ion conduction (Nobel
  of Molecular Biology 327(5), 901–909.                                 Lecture). Angewandte Chemie (International ed. in English)
LOLKEMA, J. S., SPEELMANS, G. & KONINGS, W. N. (1994).                  43(33), 4265–4277.
  Na+-coupled versus H+-coupled energy transduction in                MAEDA, S., NAKAGAWA, S., SUGA, M., YAMASHITA, E.,
  bacteria. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1187(2), 211–215.             OSHIMA, A., FUJIYOSHI, Y. & TSUKIHARA, T. (2009).
LOLL, B., KERN, J., SAENGER, W., ZOUNI, A. & BIESIADKA, J.              Structure of the connexin 26 gap junction channel at
  (2005). Towards complete cofactor arrangement in the                  3.5 Å resolution. Nature 458(7238), 597–602.
  3.0 Å resolution structure of photosystem II. Nature               MAGLIA, G., RESTREPO, M. R., MIKHAILOVA, E. & BAYLEY,
  438(7070), 1040–1044.                                                 H. (2008). Enhanced translocation of single DNA mol-
LONG, S. B., CAMPBELL, E. B. & MACKINNON, R. (2005a).                   ecules through alpha-hemolysin nanopores by manipu-
  Crystal structure of a mammalian voltage-dependent                    lation of internal charge. Proceedings of the National
  Shaker family K+ channel. Science 309(5736), 897–903.                 Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 105(50),
LONG, S. B., CAMPBELL, E. B. & MACKINNON, R. (2005b).                   19720–19725.
  Voltage sensor of Kv1.2: structural basis of electro-               MAGNANI, F., SHIBATA, Y., SERRANO-VEGA, M. J. & TATE,
  mechanical coupling. Science 309(5736), 903–908.                      C. G. (2008). Co-evolving stability and conformational
LONG, S. B., TAO, X., CAMPBELL, E. B. & MACKINNON, R.                   homogeneity of the human adenosine A2a receptor.
  (2007). Atomic structure of a voltage-dependent K+                    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
  channel in a lipid membrane-like environment. Nature                  States of America 105(31), 10744–10749.
  450(7168), 376–382.                                                 MAGUIRE, M. E. (2006). Magnesium transporters: proper-
LOVERING, A. L., DE CASTRO, L. H., LIM, D. & STRYNADKA,                 ties, regulation and structure. Frontiers in Bioscience 11,
  N. C. (2007). Structural insight into the transglycosyla-             3149–3163.
  tion step of bacterial cell-wall biosynthesis. Science              MAGUIRE, M. E. & COWAN, J. A. (2002). Magnesium
  315(5817), 1402–1405.                                                 chemistry and biochemistry. Biometals 15(3), 203–210.
LU, M. & FU, D. (2007). Structure of the zinc transporter             MALOJCIC, G., OWEN, R. L., GRIMSHAW, J. P. &
  YiiP. Science 317(5845), 1746–1748.                                   GLOCKSHUBER, R. (2008). Preparation and structure of
LUCA, S., WHITE, J. F., SOHAL, A. K., FILIPPOV, D. V., VAN              the charge-transfer intermediate of the transmembrane
  BOOM, J. H., GRISSHAMMER, R. & BALDUS, M. (2003).                     redox catalyst DsbB. FEBS Letters 582(23–24),
  The conformation of neurotensin bound to its G                        3301–3307.
152     K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

MARGER, M. D. & SAIER, JR. M. H., (1993). A major                   complex and still puzzling. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta
  superfamily of transmembrane facilitators that catalyse           1793(1), 33–41.
  uniport, symport and antiport. Trends in Biochemical            MOREAU, C. J., DUPUIS, J. P., REVILLOUD, J., ARUMUGAM, K.
  Sciences 18(1), 13–20.                                            & VIVAUDOU, M. (2008). Coupling ion channels to re-
MARLOVITS, T. C., KUBORI, T., LARA-TEJERO, M., THOMAS,              ceptors for biomolecule sensing. Nature Nanotechnology
  D., UNGER, V. M. & GALAN, J. E. (2006). Assembly of               3(10), 620–625.
  the inner rod determines needle length in the type III          MORTH, J. P., PEDERSEN, B. P., TOUSTRUO-JENSEN, M. S.,
  secretion injectisome. Nature 441(7093), 637–640.                 SORENSEN, T. L., PETERSEN, J., ANDERSEN, J. P., VILSEN,
MARTINEZ-MOLINA, D., ESHAGHI, S. & NORDLUND, P.                     B. & NISSEN, P. (2007). Crystal structure of the sodium-
  (2008). Catalysis within the lipid bilayer-structure and          potassium pump. Nature 450(7172), 1043–1049.
  mechanism of the MAPEG family of integral mem-                  MUELLER, M., GRAUSCHOPF, U., MAIER, T., GLOCKSHUBER,
  brane proteins. Current Opinion in Structural Biology 18(4),      R. & BAN, N. (2009). The structure of a cytolytic alpha-
  442–449.                                                          helical toxin pore reveals its assembly mechanism.
MARTINEZ-MOLINA, D., WETTERHOLM, A., KOHL, A.,                      Nature 459(7247), 729–730.
  MCCARTHY, A. A., NIEGOWSKI, D., OHLSON, E.,                     MUENCH, S. P., HUSS, M., SONG, C. F., PHILLIPS, C.,
  HAMMARBERG, T., ESHAGHI, S., HAEGGSTROM, J. Z. &                  WIECZOREK, H., TRINICK, J. & HARRISON, M. A. (2009).
  NORDLUND, P. (2007). Structural basis for synthesis of            Cryo-electron microscopy of the vacuolar ATPase
  inﬂammatory mediators by human leukotriene C4 syn-                motor reveals its mechanical and regulatory complexity.
  thase. Nature 448(7153), 613–616.                                 Journal of Molecular Biology 386(4), 989–999.
MEIER, T., POLZER, P., DIEDRICHS, K., WELTE, W. &                 MURAKAMI, M. & KOUYAMA, T. (2008). Crystal structure of
  DIMROTH, P. (2005). Structure of the rotor ring of F-             squid rhodopsin. Nature 453(7193), 363–367.
  Type Na+-ATPase from Ilyobacter tartaricus. Science             MURAKAMI, S., NAKASHIMA, R., YAMASHITA, E.,
  308(5722), 659–662.                                               MATSUMOTO, T. & YAMAGUCHI, A. (2006). Crystal
MENETRET, J. F., HEGDE, R. S., AGUIAR, M., GYGI, S. P.,             structures of a multidrug transporter reveal a function-
  PARK, E., RAPOPORT, T. A. & AKEY, C. W. (2008). Single            ally rotating mechanism. Nature 443(7108), 173–179.
  copies of Sec61 and TRAP associate with a non-                  MURAKAMI, S., NAKASHIMA, R., YAMASHITA, E. &
  translating mammalian ribosome. Structure 16(7),                  YAMAGUCHI, A. (2002). Crystal structure of bacterial
  1126–1137.                                                        multidrug eﬄux transporter AcrB. Nature 419(6907),
MENETRET, J. F., SCHALETZKY, J., CLEMONS, JR., W. M.,               587–593.
  OSBORNE, A. R., SKANLAND, S. S., DENISON, C., GYGI,             MURATA, K., MITSUOKA, K., HIRAI, T., WALZ, T., AGRE, P.,
  S. P., KIRKPATRICK, D. S., PARK, E., LUDTKE, S. J.,               HEYMANN, J. B., ENGEL, A. & FUJIYOSHI, Y. (2000).
  RAPOPORT, T. A. & AKEY, C. W. (2007). Ribosome                    Structural determinants of water permeation through
  binding of a single copy of the SecY complex: implica-            aquaporin-1. Nature 407(6804), 599–605.
  tions for protein translocation. Molecular Cell 28(6),          MURATA, T., YAMATO, I., KAKINUMA, Y., LESLIE, A. G. &
  1083–1092.                                                        WALKER, J. E. (2005). Structure of the rotor of the
MENG, G., SURANA, N. K., ST GEME, J. W., III &                      V-Type Na+-ATPase from Enterococcus hirae. Science
  WAKSMAN, G. (2006). Structure of the outer membrane               308(5722), 654–659.
  translocator domain of the Haemophilus inﬂuenzae Hia            NAGEL, G., OLLIG, D., FUHRMANN, M., KATERIYA, S.,
  trimeric autotransporter. EMBO Journal 25(11),                    MUSTI, A. M., BAMBERG, E. & HEGEMANN, P. (2002).
  2297–2304.                                                        Channelrhodopsin-1: a light-gated proton channel in
MICHEL, H. (1983). Crystallization of Membrane Proteins.            green algae. Science 296(5577), 2395–2398.
  Trends in Biochemical Science 8(2), 56–59.                      NAKAMOTO, R. K., BAYLIS SCANLON, J. A. & AL-SHAWI,
MIDGETT, C. R. & MADDEN, D. R. (2007). Breaking the                 M. K. (2008). The rotary mechanism of the ATP syn-
  bottleneck: eukaryotic membrane protein expression                thase. Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 476(1), 43–50.
  for high-resolution structural studies. Journal of Structural   NEWBY, Z. E., O’CONNELL, J., III, ROBLES-COLMENARES,
  Biology 160(3), 265–274.                                          Y., KHADEMI, S., MIERCKE, L. J. & STROUD, R. M. (2008).
MITCHELL, P. (1967). Translocations through natural                 Crystal structure of the aquaglyceroporin PfAQP from
  membranes. Adv Enzymol Relat Areas Mol Biol 29, 33–87.            the malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Nature
MITCHELL, P. (1979). Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and         Structural & Molecular Biology 15(6), 619–625.
  its chemiosmotic consequences. Science 206(4423),               NIKAIDO, H. (2003). Molecular basis of bacterial outer
  1148–1159.                                                        membrane permeability revisited. Microbiology and
MIYAZAWA, A., FUJIYOSHI, Y. & UNWIN, N. (2003).                     Molecular Biology Reviews 67(4), 593–656.
  Structure and gating mechanism of the acetylcholine             NOGALES, E., WOLF, S. G. & DOWNING, K. H. (1997).
  receptor pore. Nature 423(6943), 949–955.                         Visualizing the secondary structure of tubulin: three-
MOKRANJAC, D. & NEUPERT, W. (2009). Thirty years of                 dimensional map at 4 Å. Journal of Structural Biology
  protein translocation into mitochondria: unexpectedly             118(2), 119–127.
                                                                            Structures of membrane proteins            153

NOLLERT, P., ROYANT, A., PEBAY-PEYROULA, E. & LANDAU,              ligand-free G-protein-coupled receptor opsin. Nature
  E. M. (1999). Detergent-free membrane protein crys-              454(7201), 183–187.
  tallization. FEBS Letters 457(2), 205–208.                     PAULSEN, I. T., SLIWINSKI, M. K. & SAIER, JR., M. H.,
NURY, H., DAHOUT-GONZALEZ, C., TREZEGUET, V.,                      (1998). Microbial genome analyses: global comparisons
  LAUQUIN, G., BRANDOLIN, G. & PEBAY-PEYROULA, E.                  of transport capabilities based on phylogenies, bioener-
  (2005). Structural basis for lipid-mediated interactions         getics and substrate speciﬁcities. Journal of Molecular
  between mitochondrial ADP/ATP carrier monomers.                  Biology 277(3), 573–592.
  FEBS Letters 579(27), 6031–6036.                               PAUTSCH, A. & SCHULZ, G. E. (1998). Structure of the outer
O’DONNELL, R. A., HACKETT, F., HOWELL, S. A., TREECK,              membrane protein A transmembrane domain. Nature
  M., STRUCK, N., KARNAJSKI, Z., WITHERS-MARTINEZ, C.,             Structural Biology 5(11), 1013–1017.
  GILBERGER, T. W. & BLACKMAN, M. J. (2006). In-                 PAYANDEH, J., LI, C., RAMJEESINGH, M., PODUCH, E., BEAR,
  tramembrane proteolysis mediates shedding of a key               C. E. & PAI, E. F. (2008). Probing structure-function
  adhesin during erythrocyte invasion by the malaria               relationships and gating mechanisms in the CorA Mg2+
  parasite. Journal of Cell Biology 174(7), 1023–1033.             transport system. Journal of Biological Chemistry 283(17),
OESTERHELT, D. & STOECKENIUS, W. (1973). Functions of a            11721–11733.
  new photoreceptor membrane. Proceedings of the National        PAYANDEH, J. & PAI, E. F. (2006). A structural basis for
  Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 70(10),      Mg2+ homeostasis and the CorA translocation cycle.
  2853–2857.                                                       EMBO Journal 25(16), 3762–3773.
OLDHAM, M. L., DAVIDSON, A. L. & CHEN, J. (2008).                PEBAY-PEYROULA, E., DAHOUT-GONZALEZ, C., KAHN, R.,
  Structural insights into ABC transporter mechanism.              TREZEGUET, V., LAUQUIN, G. J. & BRANDOLIN, G. (2003).
  Current Opinion in Structural Biology.                           Structure of mitochondrial ADP/ATP carrier in com-
OLDHAM, M. L., KHARE, D., QUIOCHO, F. A., DAVIDSON,                plex with carboxyatractyloside. Nature 426(6962),
  A. L. & CHEN, J. (2007). Crystal structure of a catalytic        39–44.
  intermediate of the maltose transporter. Nature                PEDERSEN, B. P., BUCH-PEDERSEN, M. J., MORTH, J. P.,
  450(7169), 515–521.                                              PALMGREN, M. G. & NISSEN, P. (2007). Crystal structure
OOMEN, C. J., VAN ULSEN, P., VAN GELDER, P., FEIJEN, M.,           of the plasma membrane proton pump. Nature
  TOMMASSEN, J. & GROS, P. (2004). Structure of the                450(7172), 1111–1114.
  translocator domain of a bacterial autotransporter.            PEROZO, E., CORTES, D. M., SOMPORNPISUT, P., KLODA, A.
  EMBO Journal 23(6), 1257–1266.                                   & MARTINAC, B. (2002a). Open channel structure of
OPEKAROVA, M. & TANNER, W. (2003). Speciﬁc lipid re-               MscL and the gating mechanism of mechanosensitive
  quirements of membrane proteins–a putative bottle-               channels. Nature 418(6901), 942–948.
  neck in heterologous expression. Biochimica et Biophysica      PEROZO, E., KLODA, A., CORTES, D. M. & MARTINAC, B.
  Acta 1610(1), 11–22.                                             (2002b). Physical principles underlying the transduction
OSHIMA, A., TANI, K., HIROAKI, Y., FUJIYOSHI, Y. &                 of bilayer deformation forces during mechanosensitive
  SOSINSKY, G. E. (2007). Three-dimensional structure of           channel gating. Nature Structural Biology 9(9), 696–703.
  a human connexin26 gap junction channel reveals a plug         PEROZO, E. & REES, D. C. (2003). Structure and mechan-
  in the vestibule. Proceedings of the National Academy of         ism in prokaryotic mechanosensitive channels. Current
  Sciences of the United States of America 104(24),                Opinion in Structural Biology 13(4), 432–442.
  10034–10039.                                                   PICOT, D., LOLL, P. J. & GARAVITO, R. M. (1994). The X-
OSTERMEIER, C., HARRENGA, A., EERMLER, U. & MICHEL, H.             ray crystal structure of the membrane protein pros-
  (1997). Structure at 2.7 Å resolution of the Paracoccus         taglandin H2 synthase-1. Nature 367(6460), 243–249.
  denitriﬁcans two-subunit cytochrome c oxidase com-             PINKETT, H. W., LEE, A. T., LUM, P., LOCHER, K. P. &
  plexed with an antibody FV fragment. Proceedings of the          REES, D. C. (2007). An inward-facing conformation of a
  National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America     putative metal-chelate-type ABC transporter. Science
  94(20), 10547–10553.                                             315(5810), 373–377.
OSTERMEIER, C. & MICHEL, H. (1997). Crystallization of           POGORYELOV, D., YILDIZ, O., FARALDO-GOMEZ, J. D. &
  membrane proteins. Current Opinion in Structural Biology         MEIER, T. (2009). High-resolution structure of the rotor
  7(5), 697–701.                                                   ring of a proton-dependent ATP synthase. Nature
PALCZEWSKI, K., KUMASAKA, T., HORI, T., BEHNKE, C. A.,             Structural & Molecular Biology 16(10), 1068–1073.
  MOTOSHIMA, H., FOX, B. A., LE TRONG, I., TELLER,               POPOT, J. L. & ENGELMAN, D. M. (2000). Helical mem-
  D. C., OKADA, T., STENKAMP, R. E., YAMAMOTO, M. &                brane protein folding, stability, and evolution. Annual
  MIYANO, M. (2000). Crystal structure of rhodopsin: A G           Review of Biochemistry 69, 881–922.
  protein-coupled receptor. Science 289(5480), 739–745.          POST, R. L., SEN, A. K. & ROSENTHAL, A. S. (1965). A
PARK, J. H., SCHEERER, P., HOFMANN, K. P., CHOE, H. W.             phosphorylated intermediate in adenosine triphosphate-
  & ERNST, O. P. (2008). Crystal structure of the                  dependent sodium and potassium transport across
154     K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

  kidney membranes. Journal of Biological Chemistry 240,          RUFER, A. C., LOMIZE, A., BENZ, J., CHOMIENNE, O.,
  1437–1445.                                                        THOMA, R. & HENNIG, M. (2007). Carnitine palmitoyl-
PRIVE, G. G. (2007). Detergents for the stabilization and           transferase 2 : analysis of membrane association and
  crystallization of membrane proteins. Methods 41(4),              complex structure with a substrate analog. FEBS Letters
  388–397.                                                          581(17), 3247–3252.
QIAN, B., RAMAN, S., DAS, R., BRADLEY, P., MCCOY, A. J.,          RUFER, A. C., THOMA, R., BENZ, J., STIHLE, M., GSELL, B.,
  READ, R. J. & BAKER, D. (2007). High-resolution struc-            DE ROO, E., BANNER, D. W., MUELLER, F., CHOMIENNE,
  ture prediction and the crystallographic phase problem.           O. & HENNIG, M. (2006). The crystal structure of car-
  Nature 450(7167), 259–264.                                        nitine palmitoyltransferase 2 and implications for dia-
QIN, L., HISER, C., MULICHAK, A., GARAVITO, R. M. &                 betes treatment. Structure 14(4), 713–723.
  FERGUSON-MILLER, S. (2006). Identiﬁcation of con-               SARASTE, M. & WALKER, J. E. (1982). Internal sequence
  served lipid/detergent-binding sites in a high-resolution         repeats and the path of polypeptide in mitochondrial
  structure of the membrane protein cytochrome c oxi-               ADP/ATP translocase. FEBS Letters 144(2), 250–254.
  dase. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the    SAVAGE, D. F., EGEA, P. F., ROBLES-COLMENARES, Y.,
  United States of America 103(44), 16117–16122.                    O’CONNELL, J. D., III & STROUD, R. M. (2003).
QUICK, M., WINTHER, A. M., SHI, L., NISSEN, P.,                     Architecture and selectivity in aquaporins : 2.5 a X-ray
  WEINSTEIN, H. & JAVITCH, J. A. (2009). Binding of an              structure of aquaporin Z. PLoS Biology 1(3), E72.
  octylglucoside detergent molecule in the second sub-            SAZANOV, L. A. & HINCHLIFFE, P. (2006). Structure of the
  strate (S2) site of LeuT establishes an inhibitor-bound           hydrophilic domain of respiratory complex I from
  conformation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences     Thermus thermophilus. Science 311(5766), 1430–1436.
  of the United States of America 106(14), 5563–5568.             SCHEERER, P., PARK, J. H., HILDEBRAND, P. W., KIM, Y. J.,
                                                                    KRAUSS, N., CHOE, H. W., HOFMANN, K. P. & ERNST,
REEVES, P. J., KIM, J. M. & KHORANA, H. G. (2002).
                                                                    O. P. (2008). Crystal structure of opsin in its G-protein-
  Structure and function in rhodopsin: a tetracycline-
                                                                    interacting conformation. Nature 455(7212), 497–502.
  inducible system in stable mammalian cell lines for high-
                                                                  SCHIRMER, T., KELLER, T. A., WANG, Y. F. & ROSENBUSCH,
  level expression of opsin mutants. Proceedings of the
                                                                    J. P. (1995). Structural basis for sugar translocation
  National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
                                                                    through maltoporin channels at 3.1 Å resolution. Science
  99(21), 13413–13418.
                                                                    267(5197), 512–514.
REMAUT, H., TANG, C., HENDERSON, N. S., PINKNER, J. S.,
                                                                  SCHMIDT-KREY, I., MITSUOKA, K., HIRAI, T., MURATA, K.,
  WANG, T., HULTGREN, S. J., THANASSI, D. G., WAKSMAN,
                                                                    CENG, Y., FUJIYOSHI, Y., MORGENSTERN, R. & HEBERT,
  G. & LI, H. (2008). Fiber formation across the bacterial
                                                                    H. (2000). The three-dimensional map of microsomal
  outer membrane by the chaperone/usher pathway. Cell
                                                                    glutathione transferase 1 at 6 Å resolution. EMBO
  133(4), 640–652.
                                                                    Journal 19(23), 6311–6316.
RESSL, S., TERWISSCHA VAN SCHELTINGA, A. C., VONRHEIN,
                                                                  SCHNELL, J. R. & CHOU, J. J. (2008). Structure and mech-
  C., OTT, V. & ZIEGLER, C. (2009). Molecular basis of
                                                                    anism of the M2 proton channel of inﬂuenza A virus.
  transport and regulation in the Na(+)/betaine sym-                Nature 451(7178), 591–595.
  porter BetP. Nature 458(7234), 47–52.                           SCHOBERT, B. & LANYI, J. K. (1982). Halorhodopsin is a
REYES, N., GINTER, C. & BOUDKER, O. (2009). Transport               light-driven chloride pump. Journal of Biological Chemistry
  mechanism of a bacterial homologue of glutamate                   257(17), 10306–10313.
  transporters. Nature 462(7275), 880–885.                        SCHULZ, G. E. (2002). The structure of bacterial outer
ROBERTSON, J. D. (1957). New observations on the ultra-             membrane proteins. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1565(2),
  structure of the membranes of frog peripheral nerve               308–317.
  ﬁbers. Journal of Biophysical and Biochemical Cytology 3(6),    SCHWIEBERT, E. M. & ZSEMBERY, A. (2003). Extracellular
  1043–1048.                                                        ATP as a signaling molecule for epithelial cells.
ROSZAK, A. W., HOWARD, T. D., SOUTHALL, J., GARDINER,               Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1615(1–2), 7–32.
  A. T., LAW, C. J., ISAACS, N. W. & COGDELL, R. J. (2003).       SEEGER, M. A., SCHIEFNER, A., EICHER, T., VERREY, F.,
  Crystal structure of the RC-LH1 core complex from                 DIEDEICHS, K. & POS, K. M. (2006). Structural asym-
  Rhodopseudomonas palustris. Science 302(5652), 1969–1972.         metry of AcrB trimer suggests a peristaltic pump
RUBINSTEIN, J. L., WALKER, J. E. & HENDERSON, R. (2003).            mechanism. Science 313(5791), 1295–1298.
  Structure of the mitochondrial ATP synthase by elec-            SERRANO-VEGA, M. J., MAGNANI, F., SHIBATA, Y. & TATE,
  tron cryomicroscopy. EMBO Journal 22(23), 6182–6192.              C. G. (2008). Conformational thermostabilization of the
RUDNER, D. Z., FAWCETT, P. & LOSICK, R. (1999). A family            beta1-adrenergic receptor in a detergent-resistant form.
  of membrane-embedded metalloproteases involved in                 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
  regulated proteolysis of membrane-associated tran-                States of America 105(3), 877–882.
  scription factors. Proceedings of the National Academy of       SHAFFER, P. L., GOEHRING, A., SHANKARANARAYANAN, A. &
  Sciences of the United States of America 96(26), 14765–14770.     GOUAUX, E. (2009). Structure and mechanism of a
                                                                            Structures of membrane proteins              155

   Na+ independent amino acid transporter. Science                 Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 104(3),
   325(5943), 1010–1014.                                           1003–1008.
SHAPIRO, A. L., VINUELA, E. & MAIZEL, JR., J. V., (1967).        STOCK, D., LESLIE, A. G. & WALKER, J. E. (1999).
   Molecular weight estimation of polypeptide chains by            Molecular architecture of the rotary motor in ATP
   electrophoresis in SDS-polyacrylamide gels. Biochemical         synthase. Science 286(5445), 1700–1705.
   and Biophysical Research Communications 28(5), 815–820.       STODDART, D., HERON, A. J., MIKHAILOVA, E., MAGLIA, G.
SHI, N., YE, S., ALAM, A., CHEN, L. & JIANG, Y. (2006).            & BAYLEY, H. (2009). Single-nucleotide discrimination
   Atomic structure of a Na+- and K+-conducting                    in immobilized DNA oligonucleotides with a biological
   channel. Nature 440(7083), 570–574.                             nanopore. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
SHIBATA, Y., WHITE, J. F., SERRANO-VEGA, M. J., MAGNANI,           the United States of America 106(19), 7702–7707.
   F., ALOIA, A. L., GRISSHAMMER, R. & TATE, C. G. (2009).       STOECKENIUS, W. & ROWEN, R. (1967). A morphological
   Thermostabilization of the neurotensin receptor NTS1.           study of Halobacterium halobium and its lysis in media of
   Journal of Molecular Biology 390(2), 262–277.                   low salt concentration. Journal of Cell Biology 34(1),
SHINODA, T., OGAWA, H., CORNELIUS, F. & TOYOSHIMA, C.              365–393.
   (2009). Crystal structure of the sodium-potassium pump        STOUFFER, A. L., ACHARYA, R., SALOM, D., LEVINE, A. S.,
   at 2.4 Å resolution. Nature 459(7245), 446–450.                DI COSTANZO, L., SOTO, C. S., TERESHKO, V., NANDA, V.,
SINGER, S. J. & NICOLSON, G. L. (1972). The ﬂuid mosaic            STAYROOK, S. & DEGRADO, W. F. (2008). Structural basis
   model of the structure of cell membranes. Science               for the function and inhibition of an inﬂuenza virus
   175(23), 720–731.                                               proton channel. Nature 451(7178), 596–599.
SINGH, S. K., YAMASHITA, A. & GOUAUX, E. (2007).                 STROEBEL, D., CHOQUET, Y., POPOT, J. L. & PICOT, D.
   Antidepressant binding site in a bacterial homologue of
                                                                   (2003). An atypical haem in the cytochrome b(6)f
   neurotransmitter transporters. Nature 448(7156),
                                                                   complex. Nature 426(6965), 413–418.
   952–956.
                                                                 SUBRAMANIAM, S. & HENDERSON, R. (2000). Molecular
SKOU, J. C. (1957). The inﬂuence of some cations on an
                                                                   mechanism of vectorial proton translocation by bacter-
   adenosine triphosphatase from peripheral nerves.
                                                                   iorhodopsin. Nature 406(6796), 653–657.
   Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 23(2), 394–401.
                                                                 SUI, H., HAN, B. G., LEE, J. K., WALIAN, P. & JAP, B. K.
SMIRNOVA, I. N. & KABACK, H. R. (2003). A mutation in
                                                                   (2001). Structural basis of water-speciﬁc transport
   the lactose permease of Escherichia coli that decreases
                                                                   through the AQP1 water channel. Nature 414(6866),
   conformational ﬂexibility and increases protein stability.
                                                                   872–878.
   Biochemistry 42(10), 3025–3031.
                                                                 SUKHAREV, S., BETANZOS, M., CHIANG, C. S. & GUY, H. R.
SNIJDER, H. J., UBARRETXENA-BELANDIA, I., BLAAUW, M.,
                                                                   (2001). The gating mechanism of the large mechan-
   KALK, K. H., VERHEIJ, H. M., EGMOND, M. R., DEKKER,
                                                                   osensitive channel MscL. Nature 409(6821), 720–724.
   N. & DIJKSTRA, B. W. (1999). Structural evidence for
                                                                 SUKHAREV, S. & COREY, D. P. (2004). Mechanosensitive
   dimerization-regulated activation of an integral mem-
                                                                   channels: multiplicity of families and gating paradigms.
   brane phospholipase. Nature 401(6754), 717–721.
SONG, L., HOBAUGH, M. R., SHUSTAK, C., CHELEY, S.,                 Science’s STKE: Signal Transduction Knowledge Environment
   BAYLEY, H. & GOUAUX, J. E. (1996). Structure of sta-            2004(219), re4.
   phylococcal alpha-hemolysin, a heptameric transmem-           SULLIVAN, J. P., DICKINSON, D. & CHASE, H. A. (1998).
   brane pore. Science 274(5294), 1859–1866.                       Methanotrophs, Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b, sMMO,
SORENSEN, H. P. & MORTENSEN, K. K. (2005). Advanced                and their application to bioremediation. Critical Reviews
   genetic strategies for recombinant protein expression in        in Microbiology 24(4), 335–373.
   Escherichia coli. Journal of Biotechnology 115(2), 113–128.   SUN, F., HUO, X., ZHAI, Y., WANG, A., XU, J., SU, D.,
STANDFUSS, J., XIE, G., EDWARDS, P. C., BURGHAMMER, M.,            BARTLAM, M. & RAO, Z. (2005). Crystal structure of
   OPRIAN, D. D. & SCHERTLER, G. F. (2007). Crystal                mitochondrial respiratory membrane protein complex
   structure of a thermally stable rhodopsin mutant. Journal       II. Cell 121(7), 1043–1057.
   of Molecular Biology 372(5), 1179–1188.                       TAJKHORSHID, E., NOLLERT, P., JENSEN, M. O., MIERCKE,
STEINBACHER, S., BASS, R., STROP, P. & REES, D. C. (2007).         L. J., O’CONNELL, J., STROUD, R. M. & SCHULTEN, K.
   Structures of the prokaryotic mechanosensitive chan-            (2002). Control of the selectivity of the aquaporin water
   nels MscL and MscS. In Current Topics in Membranes, vol.        channel family by global orientational tuning. Science
   58, pp. 1–24.                                                   296(5567), 525–530.
STEVENSON, L. G., STRISOVSKY, K., CLEMMER, K. M.,                TASNEEM, A., IYER, L. M., JAKOBSSON, E. & ARAVIND, L.
   BHATT, S., FREEMAN, M. & RATHER, P. N. (2007).                  (2005). Identiﬁcation of the prokaryotic ligand-gated
   Rhomboid protease AarA mediates quorum-sensing                  ion channels and their implications for the mechanisms
   in Providencia stuartii by activating TatA of the               and origins of animal Cys-loop ion channels. Genome
   twin-arginine translocase. Proceedings of the National          Biology 6(1), R4.
156      K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

TATE, C. G. (2001). Overexpression of mammalian integral             UNGER, V. M., KUMAR, N. M., GILULA, N. B. & YEAGER,
  membrane proteins for structural studies. FEBS Letters               M. (1999). Three-dimensional structure of a re-
  504(3), 94–98.                                                       combinant gap junction membrane channel. Science
TAVERNARAKIS, N. & DRISCOLL, M. (1997). Molecular                      283(5405), 1176–1180.
  modeling of mechanotransduction in the nematode                    UNWIN, N. (2005). Reﬁned structure of the nicotinic acet-
  Caenorhabditis elegans. Annual Review of Physiology 59,              ylcholine receptor at 4Å resolution. Journal of Molecular
  659–689.                                                             Biology 346(4), 967–989.
TEMPEL, B. L., PAPAZIAN, D. M., SCHWARZ, T. L., JAN, Y. N.           URBAN, S., LEE, J. R. & FREEMAN, M. (2001). Drosophila
  & JAN, L. Y. (1987). Sequence of a probable potassium                rhomboid-1 deﬁnes a family of putative intramembrane
  channel component encoded at Shaker locus of                         serine proteases. Cell 107(2), 173–182.
  Drosophila. Science 237(4816), 770–775.                            URBAN, S., SCHLIEPER, D. & FREEMAN, M. (2002).
TORNROTH-HORSEFIELD, S., WANG, Y., HEDFALK, K.,                        Conservation of intramembrane proteolytic activity and
  JOHANSON, U., KARLSSON, M., TAJKHORSHID, E., NEUTZE,                 substrate speciﬁcity in prokaryotic and eukaryotic
  R. & KJELLBOM, P. (2006). Structural mechanism of                    rhomboids. Current Biology 12(17), 1507–1512.
  plant aquaporin gating. Nature 439(7077), 688–694.                 URBAN, S. & WOLFE, M. S. (2005). Reconstitution of in-
TOYOSHIMA, C. (2008). Structural aspects of ion pumping                tramembrane proteolysis in vitro reveals that pure
  by Ca2+-ATPase of sarcoplasmic reticulum. Archives of                rhomboid is suﬃcient for catalysis and speciﬁcity.
  Biochemistry and Biophysics 476(1), 3–11.                            Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
TOYOSHIMA, C., NAKASAKO, M., NOMURA, H. & OGAWA, H.                    States of America 102(6), 1883–1888.
  (2000). Crystal structure of the calcium pump of sarco-            VAN DEN BERG, B., CLEMONS, JR., W. M., COLLINSON, I.,
  plasmic reticulum at 2.6 Å resolution. Nature 405(6787),            MODIS, Y., HARTMANN, E., HARRISON, S. C. & RAPOPORT,
  647–655.                                                             T. A. (2004). X-ray structure of a protein-conducting
TRAN, Q. M., ROTHERY, R. A., MAKLASHINA, E., CECCHINI,                 channel. Nature 427(6969), 36–44.
  G. & WEINER, J. H. (2007). Escherichia coli succinate de-          VAN     HORN, W. D., KIM, H. J., ELLIS, C. D.,
  hydrogenase variant lacking the heme b. Proceedings of the           HADZISELIMOVIC, A., SULISTIJO, E. S., KARRA, M. D.,
  National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America         TIAN, C., SONNICHSEN, F. D. & SANDERS, C. R. (2009).
  104(46), 18007–18012.                                                Solution nuclear magnetic resonance structure of
TSUKAZAKI, T., MORI, H., FUKAI, S., ISHITANI, R., MORI, T.,            membrane-integral diacylglycerol kinase. Science
  DOHMAE, N., PEREDERINA, A., SUGITA, Y., VASSYLYEV,                   324(5935), 1726–1729.
  D. G., ITO, K. & NUREKI, O. (2008). Conformational                 VANDEPUTTE-RUTTEN, L., KRAMER, R. A., KROON, J.,
  transition of Sec machinery inferred from bacterial                  DEKKER, N., EGMOND, M. R. & GROS, P. (2001). Crystal
  SecYE structures. Nature 455(7215), 988–991.                         structure of the outer membrane protease OmpT from
TSUKIHARA, T., AOYAMA, H., YAMASHITA, E., TOMIZAKI, T.,                Escherichia coli suggests a novel catalytic site. EMBO
  YAMAGUCHI, H., SHINZAWA-ITOH, K., NAKASHIMA, R.,                     Journal 20(18), 5033–5039.
  YAONO, R. & YOSHIKAWA, S. (1996). The whole structure              VASQUEZ, V., SOTOMAYOR, M., CORDERO-MORALES, J.,
  of the 13-subunit oxidized cytochrome c oxidase at 2.8               SCHULTEN, K. & PEROZO, E. (2008). A structural mech-
  A. Science 272(5265), 1136–1144.                                     anism for MscS gating in lipid bilayers. Science 321(5893),
TSUKIHARA, T., SHIMOKATA, K., KATAYAMA, Y., SHIMADA,                   1210–1214.
  H., MURAMOTO, K., AOYAMA, H., MOCHIZUKI, M.,                       VEDADI, M., NIESEN, F. H., ALLALI-HASSANI, A., FEDOROV,
  SHINZAWA-ITOH, K., YAMASHITA, E., YAO, M., ISHIMURA,                 O. Y., FINERTY, JR., P. J., WASNET, G. A., YEUNG, R.,
  Y. & YOSHIKAWA, S. (2003). The low-spin heme of cy-                  ARROWSMITH, C., BALL, L. J., BERGLUND, H., HUI, R.,
  tochrome c oxidase as the driving element of the pro-                MARSDEN, B. D., NORDLUND, P., SUNDSTROM, M.,
  ton-pumping process. Proceedings of the National Academy             WEIGELT, J. & EDWARDS, A. M. (2006). Chemical
  of Sciences of the United States of America 100(26),                 screening methods to identify ligands that promote
  15304–15309.                                                         protein stability, protein crystallization, and structure
UBARRETXENA-BELANDIA, I., BALDWIN, J. M., SCHULDINER,                  determination. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  S. & TATE, C. G. (2003). Three-dimensional structure of              Sciences of the United States of America 103(43),
  the bacterial multidrug transporter EmrE shows it is an              15835–15840.
  asymmetric homodimer. EMBO Journal 22(23),                         VENTER, H., SHILLING, R. A., VELAMAKANNI, S.,
  6175–6181.                                                           BALAKRISHNAN, L. & VAN VEEN, H. W. (2003). An ABC
UJWAL, R., CASCIO, D., COLLETIER, J. P., FAHAM, S., ZHANG,             transporter with a secondary-active multidrug trans-
  J., TORO, L., PING, P. & ABRAMSON, J. (2008). The crystal            locator domain. Nature 426(6968), 866–870.
  structure of mouse VDAC1 at 2.3 Å resolution reveals              VOGT, J. & SCHULZ, G. E. (1999). The structure of the
  mechanistic insights into metabolite gating. Proceedings of          outer membrane protein OmpX from Escherichia coli
  the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America     reveals possible mechanisms of virulence. Structure 7(10),
  105(46), 17742–17747.                                                1301–1309.
                                                                            Structures of membrane proteins                157

VOLLMAR, M., SCHLIEPER, D., WINN, M., BUCHNER, C. &                A. D. (2008). Structure and molecular mechanism of a
  GROTH, G. (2009). Structure of the c14 Rotor Ring of             nucleobase-cation-symport-1 family transporter. Science
  the Proton Translocating Chloroplast ATP Synthase.               322(5902), 709–713.
  Journal of Biological Chemistry 284(27), 18228–18235.          WHITE, S. H. & WIMLEY, W. C. (1999). Membrane protein
VON BALLMOOS, C., COOK, G. M. & DIMROTH, P. (2008).                folding and stability: physical principles. Annual Review of
  Unique rotary ATP synthase and its biological diversity.         Biophysics and Biomolecular Structure 28, 319–365.
  Annual Review of Biophysics 37, 43–64.                         WILLIAMS, K. A. (2000). Three-dimensional structure of
VON HEIJNE, G. (2006). Membrane-protein topology.                  the ion-coupled transport protein NhaA. Nature
  Nature Reviews. Molecular Cell Biology 7(12), 909–918.           403(6765), 112–115.
WANG, W., BLACK, S. S., EDWARDS, M. D., MILLER, S.,              WOLFE, M. S. & KOPAN, R. (2004). Intramembrane pro-
  MORRISON, E. L., BARTLETT, W., DONG, C., NAISMITH,               teolysis: theme and variations. Science 305(5687),
  J. H. & BOOTH, I. R. (2008). The structure of an open            1119–1123.
  form of an E. coli mechanosensitive channel at 3.45 Å         WU, Z., YAN, N., FENG, L., OBERSTEIN, A., YAN, H., BAKER,
  resolution. Science 321(5893), 1179–1183.                        R. P., GU, L., JEFFREY, P. D., URBAN, S. & SHI, Y. (2006).
WANG, Y. & HA, Y. (2007). Open-cap conformation of                 Structural analysis of a rhomboid family intramembrane
  intramembrane protease GlpG. Proceedings of the National         protease reveals a gating mechanism for substrate entry.
  Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 104(7),      Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 13(12), 1084–1091.
  2098–2102.                                                     YAMASHITA, A., SINGH, S. K., KAWATE, T., JIN, Y. &
WANG, Y., HUANG, Y., WANG, Y. J., CHENG, C., HUANG,                GOUAUX, E. (2005). Crystal structure of a bacterial
  W., LU, P., XU, Y. N., WANG, P., YAN, N. & SHI, Y.               homologue of Na+/Clxdependent neurotransmitter
  (2009). Structure of the formate transporter FocA re-            transporters. Nature 437(7056), 215–223.
  veals a pentameric aquaporin-like channel. Nature
                                                                 YAMASHITA, E., ZHALNINA, M. V., ZAKHAROV, S. D.,
  462(7272), 467–472.
                                                                   SHARMA, O. & CRAMER, W. A. (2008). Crystal structures
WANG, Y., MAEGAWA, S., AKIYAMA, Y. & HA, Y. (2007).
                                                                   of the OmpF porin: function in a colicin translocon.
  The role of L1 loop in the mechanism of rhomboid
                                                                   EMBO Journal 27(15), 2171–2180.
  intramembrane protease GlpG. Journal of Molecular
                                                                 YANKOVSKAYA, V., HORSEFIELD, R., TORNROTH, S., LUNA-
  Biology 374(4), 1104–1113.
                                                                   CHAVEZ, C., MIYOSHI, H., LEGER, C., BYRNE, B.,
WANG, Y., ZANG, Y. & HA, Y. (2006). Crystal structure of a
                                                                   CECCHINI, G. & IWATA, S. (2003). Architecture of suc-
  rhomboid family intramembrane protease. Nature
                                                                   cinate dehydrogenase and reactive oxygen species gen-
  444(7116), 179–180.
                                                                   eration. Science 299(5607), 700–704.
WARD, A., REYES, C. L., YU, J., ROTH, C. B. & CHANG, G.
                                                                 YANO, J. K., WESTER, M. R., SCHOCH, G. A., GRIFFIN, K. J.,
  (2007). Flexibility in the ABC transporter MsbA: alter-
                                                                   STOUT, C. D. & JOHNSON, E. F. (2004). The structure of
  nating access with a twist. Proceedings of the National
                                                                   human microsomal cytochrome P450 3A4 determined
  Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 104(48),
                                                                   by X-ray crystallography to 2.05-A resolution. Journal of
  19005–19010.
WARNE, T., SERRANO-VEGA, M. J., BAKER, J. G.,                      Biological Chemistry 279(37), 38091–38094.
  MOUKHAMETZIANOV, R., EDWARDS, P. C., HENDERSON,                YE, J., RAWSON, R. B., KOMURO, R., CHEN, X., DAVE, U. P.,
  R., LESLIE, A. G., TATE, C. G. & SCHERTLER, G. F.                PRYWES, R., BROWN, M. S. & GOLDSTEIN, J. L. (2000).
  (2008). Structure of a beta1-adrenergic G-protein-cou-           ER stress induces cleavage of membrane-bound ATF6
  pled receptor. Nature 454(7203), 486–491.                        by the same proteases that process SREBPs. Molecular
WEBER, K. & OSBORN, M. (1969). The reliability of mol-             Cell 6(6), 1355–1364.
  ecular weight determinations by dodecyl sulfate-poly-          YEH, J. I., CHINTE, U. & DU, S. (2008). Structure of gly-
  acrylamide gel electrophoresis. Journal of Biological            cerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, an essential mono-
  Chemistry 244(16), 4406–4412.                                    topic membrane enzyme involved in respiration and
WEIHOFEN, A. & MARTOGLIO, B. (2003). Intramembrane-                metabolism. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
  cleaving proteases: controlled liberation of proteins and        the United States of America 105(9), 3280–3285.
  bioactive peptides. Trends in Cell Biology 13(2), 71–78.       YERNOOL, D., BOUDKER, O., JIN, Y. & GOUAUX, E. (2004).
WEMMIE, J. A., PRICE, M. P. & WELSH, M. J. (2006). Acid-           Structure of a glutamate transporter homologue from
  sensing ion channels: advances, questions and thera-             Pyrococcus horikoshii. Nature 431(7010), 811–818.
  peutic opportunities. Trends in Neuroscience 29(10),           YILDIZ, O., VINOTHKUMAR, K. R., GOSWAMI, P. &
  578–586.                                                         KUHLBRANDT, W. (2006). Structure of the monomeric
WEYAND, S., SHIMAMURA, T., YAJIMA, S., SUZUKI, S., MIRZA,          outer-membrane porin OmpG in the open and closed
  O., KRUSONG, K., CARPENTER, E. P., RUTHERFORD,                   conformation. EMBO Journal 25(15), 3702–3713.
  N. G., HADDEN, J. M., O’REILLY, J., MA, P., SAIDIJAM,          YIN, Y., HE, X., SZEWCZYK, P., NGUYEN, T. & CHANG, G.
  M., PATCHING, S. G., HOPE, R. J., NORBERTCZAK, H. T.,            (2006). Structure of the multidrug transporter EmrD
  ROACH, P. C., IWATA, S., HENDERSON, P. J. & CAMERON,             from Escherichia coli. Science 312(5774), 741–744.
158      K. R. Vinothkumar and R. Henderson

YOSHIKAWA, S., SHINZAWA-ITOH, K., NAKASHIMA, R.,                        insights into DsbB-catalyzed disulﬁde bond formation.
  YAONO, R., YAMASHITA, E., INOUE, N., YAO, M., FEI,                    Molecular Cell 31(6), 896–908.
  M. J., LIBEU, C. P., MIZUSHIMA, T., YAMAGUCHI, H.,                  ZHOU, Y., MORAIS-CABRAL, J. H., KAUFMAN, A. &
  TOMIZAKI, T. & TSUKIHARA, T. (1998). Redox-coupled                    MACKINNON, R. (2001). Chemistry of ion coordination
  crystal structural changes in bovine heart cytochrome c               and hydration revealed by a K+ channel-Fab complex at
  oxidase. Science 280(5370), 1723–1729.                                2.0 Å resolution. Nature 414(6859), 43–48.
YU, Y. T. & KROOS, L. (2000). Evidence that SpoIVFB is a              ZHOU, Z., ZHEN, J., KARPOWICH, N. K., GOETZ, R. M.,
                                                                        LAW, C. J., REITH, M. E. & WANG, D. N. (2007). LeuT-
  novel type of membrane metalloprotease governing in-
                                                                        desipramine structure reveals how antidepressants
  tercompartmental communication during Bacillus subtilis
                                                                        block neurotransmitter reuptake. Science 317(5843),
  sporulation. Journal of Bacteriology 182(11), 3305–3309.
                                                                        1390–1393.
ZHENG, L., KOSTREWA, D., BERNECHE, S., WINKLER, F. K.
                                                                      ZHU, J., QIU, Y. S., FIGUEROA, D. J., BANDI, V.,
  & LI, X. D. (2004). The mechanism of ammonia trans-
                                                                        GALCZENSKI, H., HAMADA, K., GUNTUPALLI, K. K.,
  port based on the crystal structure of AmtB of                        EVANS, J. F. & JEFFERY, P. K. (2005). Localization and
  Escherichia coli. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences     upregulation of cysteinyl leukotriene-1 receptor in
  of the United States of America 101(49), 17090–17095.                 asthmatic bronchial mucosa. American Journal of
ZHOU, Y., CIERPICKI, T., JIMENEZ, R. H., LUKASIK, S. M.,                Respiratory Cell and Molecular Biology 33(6), 531–540.
  ELLENA, J. F., CAFISO, D. S., KADOKURA, H., BECKWITH,               ZIMMER, J., NAM, Y. & RAPOPORT, T. A. (2008). Structure
  J. & BUSHWELLER, J. H. (2008). NMR solution structure                 of a complex of the ATPase SecA and the protein-
  of the integral membrane enzyme DsbB: functional                      translocation channel. Nature 455(7215), 936–943.
